What's new, Socrates, to make you leave your usual haunts in the Lyceum and spend your time here by the king archon's court?
Surely you are not prosecuting anyone before the king archon as I am?
The Athenians do not call this a prosecution but an indictment, Euthyphro.
What is this you say?
Someone must have indicted you, for you are not going to tell me that you have indicted someone else.
But someone else has indicted you?
I do not really know him myself, Euthyphro.
He is apparently young and unknown.
They call him Meletus, I believe.
He belongs to the Pitthean deme, if you know anyone from that deme called Meletus, with long hair, not much of a beard, and a rather aquiline nose.
I don't know him, Socrates.
What charge does he bring against you?
A not ignoble one I think
, for it is no small thing for a young man to have knowledge of such an important subject.
He says he knows how our young men are corrupted and who corrupts them.
He is likely to be wise, and when he sees my ignorance corrupting his contemporaries, he proceeds to accuse me to the city as to their mother.
I think he is the only one of our public men to start out the right way, for it is right to care first that the young should be as good as possible, just as a good farmer is likely to take care of the young plants first, and of the others later.
So, too, Meletus first gets rid of us who corrupt the young shoots, as he says, and then afterwards he will obviously take care of the older ones and become a source of great blessings for the city, as seems likely to happen to one who started out this way.
I could wish this were true, Socrates, but I fear the opposite may happen.
He seems to me to start out by harming the very heart of Euthyphro the city by attempting to wrong you.
Tell me, what does he say you do to corrupt the young?
Strange things, to hear him tell it, for he says that I am a maker of gods, and on the ground that I create new gods while not believing in the old gods, he has indicted me for their sake, as he puts it.
I understand, Socrates.
This is because you say that the divine sign keeps coming to you.
So he has written this indictment against you as one who makes innovations in religious matters, and he comes to court to slander you, knowing that such things are easily misrepresented to the crowd.
The same is true in my case.
Whenever I speak of divine matters in the assembly and foretell the future, they laugh me down as if I were crazy; and yet I have foretold nothing that did not happen.
Nevertheless, they envy all of us who do this.
One need not worry about them, but meet them head on.
My dear Euthyphro, to be laughed at does not matter perhaps, for the Athenians do not mind anyone they think clever, as long as he does not teach his own wisdom, but if they think that he makes others to be like himself
they get angry, whether through envy, as you say, or for some other reason.
I have certainly no desire to test their feelings towards me in this matter.
Perhaps you seem to make yourself but rarely available, and not be willing to teach your own wisdom, but I'm afraid that my liking for people makes them think that I pour out to anybody anything I have to say, not only without charging a fee but even glad to reward anyone who is willing to listen.
If then they were intending to laugh at me, as you say they laugh at you, there would be nothing unpleasant in their spending their time in court laughing and jesting, but if they are going to be serious, the outcome is not clear except to you prophets.
Perhaps it will come to nothing, Socrates, and you will fight your case as you think best, as I think I will mine.
What is your case, Euthyphro?
Are you the defendant or the prosecutor?
Whom do you prosecute?
One whom I am thought crazy to prosecute.
Are you pursuing someone who will easily escape you?
Far from it, for he is quite old.
What is the case about?
Certainly, Euthyphro, most men would not know how they could do this and be right.
It is not the part of anyone to do this, but of one who is far advanced in wisdom.
Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, that is so.
Is then the man your father killed one of your relatives?
Or is that obvious, for you would not prosecute your father for the murder of a stranger.
It is ridiculous, Socrates, for you to think that it makes any difference whether the victim is a stranger or a relative.
One should only watch whether the killer acted justly or not; if he acted justly, let him go, but if not, one should prosecute, if, that is to say, the killer shares your hearth and table.
The pollution is the same if you knowingly keep company with such a man and do not cleanse yourself and him by bringing him to justice.
The victim was a dependent of mine, and when we were farming in Naxos he was a servant of ours.
He killed one of our household slaves in drunken anger, so my father bound him hand and foot and threw him in a ditch, then sent a man here to inquire from the priest what should be done.
During that time he gave no thought or care to the bound man, as being a killer, and it was no matter if he died, which he did.
Hunger and cold and his bonds caused his death before the messenger came back from the seer.
Both my father and my other relatives are angry that I am prosecuting my father for murder on behalf of a murderer when he hadn't even killed him, they say, and even if he had, the dead man does not deserve a thought, since he was a killer.
For, they say, it is impious for a son to prosecute his father for murder.
But their ideas of the divine attitude to piety and impiety are wrong, Socrates.
Whereas, by Zeus, Euthyphro, you think that your knowledge of the divine, and of piety and impiety, is so accurate that, when those things happened as you say, you have no fear of having acted impiously in bringing your father to trial?
I should be of no use, Socrates, and Euthyphro would not be superior to the majority of men, if I did not have accurate knowledge of all such things.
It is indeed most important, my admirable Euthyphro, that I should become your pupil, and as regards this indictment, challenge Meletus about these very things and say to him: that in the past too I considered knowledge about the divine to be most important, and that now that he says that I am guilty of improvising and innovating about the gods I have become your pupil.
I would say to him: 'If, Meletus, you agree that Euthyphro is wise in these matters, consider me, too, to have the right beliefs and do not bring me to trial.
If you do not think so, then prosecute that teacher of mine, not me, for corrupting the older men, me and his own father, by teaching me and by exhorting and punishing him.'
If he Euthyphro is not convinced, and does not discharge me or indict you instead of me, I shall repeat the same challenge in court.
Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, and, if he should try to indict me, I think I would find his weak spots and the talk in court would be about him rather than about me.
It is because I realize this that I am eager to become your pupil, my dear friend.
I know that other people as well as this Meletus do not even seem to notice you, whereas he sees me so sharply and clearly that he indicts me for ungodliness.
So tell me now, by Zeus, what you just now maintained you clearly knew:
what kind of thing do you say that godliness and ungodliness are, both as regards murder and other things; or is the pious not the same and alike in every action, and the impious the opposite of all that is pious and like itself, and everything that is to be
impious presents us with one form or appearance in so far as it is impious?
Tell me then, what is the pious, and what the impious, do you say?
I say that the pious is to do what I am doing now, to prosecute the wrongdoer, be it about murder or temple robbery or anything else, whether the wrongdoer is your father or your mother or anyone else; not to prosecute is impious.
And observe, Socrates, that I can cite powerful evidence that the law is so.
I have already said to others that such actions are right, not to favor the ungodly, whoever they are.
These people themselves believe that Zeus is the best and most just of the gods, yet they agree that he bound his father because he unjustly swallowed his sons, and that he in turn castrated his father for similar reasons.
But they are angry with me because I am prosecuting my father for his wrongdoing.
They contradict themselves in what they say about the gods and about me.
Indeed, Euthyphro, this is the reason why I am a defendant in the case, because I find it hard to accept things like that being said about the gods, and it is likely to be the reason why I shall be told I do wrong.
Now, however, if you, who have full knowledge of such things, share their opinions, then we must agree with them, too, it would seem.
For what are we to say, we who agree that we ourselves have no knowledge of them?
Tell me, by the god of friendship, do you really believe these things are true?
Yes, Socrates, and so are even more surprising things, of which the majority has no knowledge.
And do you believe that there really is war among the gods, and terrible enmities and battles, and
other such things as are told by the poets, and other sacred stories such as are embroidered by good writers and by representations of which the robe of the goddess is adorned when it is carried up to the Acropolis?
Are we to say these things are true, Euthyphro?
Euthyphro Not only these, Socrates, but
, as I was saying just now, I will, if you wish, relate many other things about the gods which I know will amaze you.
I should not be surprised, but you will tell me these at leisure some other time.
For now, try to tell me more clearly what I was asking just now, for, my friend, you did not teach me adequately when I asked you what the pious was, but you told me that what you are doing now, in prosecuting your father for murder, is pious.
And I told the truth, Socrates.
You agree, however, that there are many other pious actions.
that I did not bid you tell me one or two of the many pious actions but that form itself that makes all pious actions pious,
for you agreed that all impious actions are impious and all pious actions pious through one form, or don't you remember?
Tell me then what this form itself is, so that I may look upon it and, using it as a model, say that any action of yours or another's that is of that kind
is pious, and if it is not that it is not.
If that is how you want it, Socrates, that is how I will tell you.
That is what I want.
Well then, what is dear to the gods is pious, what is not is impious.
Splendid, Euthyphro!
You have now answered in the way I wanted.
Whether your answer is true
I do not know yet, but you will obviously show me that what you say is true.
Come then, let us examine what we mean.
An action or a man dear to the gods is pious, but an action or a man hated by the gods is impious.
They are not the same, but quite opposite, the pious and the impious.
And that seems to be a good statement?
We have also stated that the gods are in a state of discord, that they are at odds with each other, Euthyphro, and that they are at enmity with each other.
Has that, too, been said?
What are the subjects of difference that cause hatred and anger?
Let us look at it this way.
If you and I were to differ about numbers as to which is the greater, would this difference make us enemies and angry with each other, or would we proceed to count and soon resolve our difference about this?
We would certainly do so.
Again, if we differed about the larger and the smaller, we would turn to measurement and soon cease to differ.
And about the heavier and the lighter, we would resort to weighing and be reconciled.
What subject of difference would make us angry and hostile to each other if we were unable to come to a decision?
Perhaps you do not have an answer ready, but examine as I tell you whether these subjects are the just and the unjust, the beautiful and the ugly, the good and the bad.
Are these not the subjects of difference about which, when we are unable to come to a satisfactory decision, you and I and other men become hostile to each other whenever we do?
That is the difference, Socrates, about those subjects.
What about the gods, Euthyphro?
If indeed they have differences, will it not be about these same subjects?
It certainly must be so.
Then according to your argument, my good Euthyphro, different gods consider different things to be just, beautiful, ugly, good, and bad, for they would not be at odds with one another unless they differed about these subjects, would they?
And they like what each of them considers beautiful, good, and just, and hate the opposites of these?
But you say that the same things are considered just by some gods and unjust by others, and as they dispute about these things they are at odds and at war with each other.
The same things then are loved by the gods and hated by the gods, and would be both god loved and god hated.
And the same things would be both pious and impious, according to this argument?
So you did not answer my question, you surprising man.
I did not ask you what same thing is both pious and impious, and it appears that what is loved by the gods is also hated by them.
So it is in no way surprising if your present action, namely punishing your father, may be pleasing to Zeus but displeasing to Cronus and Uranus, pleasing to Hephaestus but displeasing to Hera, and so with any other gods who differ from each other on this subject.
I think, Socrates, that on this subject no gods would differ from one another, that whoever has killed anyone unjustly should pay the penalty.
Well now, Euthyphro, have you ever heard any man maintaining that one who has killed or done anything else unjustly should not pay the penalty?
They never cease to dispute on this subject, both elsewhere and in the courts, for when they have committed many wrongs they do and say anything to avoid the penalty.
Do they agree they have done wrong, Euthyphro, and in spite of so agreeing do they nevertheless say they should not be punished?
No, they do not agree on that point.
So they do not say or do just anything.
For they do not venture to say this, or dispute that they must not pay the penalty if they have done wrong, but I think they deny doing wrong.
Then they do not dispute that the wrongdoer must be punished, but they may disagree as to who the wrongdoer is, what he did, and when.
Do not the gods have the same experience, if indeed they are at odds with each other about the just and the unjust, as your argument maintains?
Some assert that they wrong one another, while others deny it, but no one among gods or men ventures to say that the wrongdoer must not be punished.
Yes, that is true, Socrates, as to the main point.
And those who disagree, whether men or gods, dispute about each action, if indeed the gods disagree.
Some say it is done justly, others unjustly.
Come now, my dear Euthyphro, tell me, too, that I may become wiser,
what proof you have that all the gods consider that man to have been killed unjustly who became a murderer while in your service, was bound by the master of his victim, and died in his bonds before the one who bound him found out from the seers what was to be done with him, and that it is right for a son to denounce and to prosecute his father on behalf of such a man.
Come, try to show me a clear sign that all the gods definitely believe this action to be right.
If you can give me adequate proof of this, I shall never cease to extol your wisdom.
This is perhaps no light task, Socrates, though I could show you very clearly.
I understand that you think me more dull witted than the jury, as you will obviously show them that these actions were unjust and that all the gods hate such actions.
I will show it to them clearly, Socrates, if only they will listen to me.
They will listen if they think you show them well.
But this thought came to me as you were speaking, and I am examining it, saying to myself: 'If Euthyphro shows me conclusively that all the gods consider Euthyphro such a death unjust, to what greater extent have I learned from him the nature of piety and impiety?
This action would then, it seems, be hated by the gods, but the pious and the impious were not thereby now defined, for what is hated by the gods has also been shown to be loved by them.'
So I will not insist on this point; let us assume, if you wish, that all the gods consider this unjust and that they all hate it.
However, is this the correction we are making in our discussion, that what all the gods hate is impious, and what they all love is pious, and that what some gods love and others hate is neither or both?
Is that how you now wish us to define piety and impiety?
What prevents us from doing so, Socrates?
For my part nothing, Euthyphro, but you look whether on your part this proposal will enable you to teach me most easily what you promised.
I would certainly say that the pious is what all the gods love, and the opposite, what all the gods hate, is the impious.
Then let us again examine whether that is a sound statement, or do we let it pass, and if one of us, or someone else, merely says that something is so
, do we accept that it is so?
Or should we examine what the speaker means?
We must examine it, but I certainly think that this is now a fine statement.
We shall soon know better whether it is.
Is the pious being loved by the gods because it is pious, or is it pious because it is being loved by the gods?
I don't know what you mean, Socrates.
I shall try to explain more clearly: we speak of something carried and something carrying, of something led and something leading, of something seen and something seeing, and you understand that these things are all different from one another and how they differ?
So there is also something loved and a different thing something loving.
Tell me then whether the thing carried is a carried thing because it is being carried, or for some other reason?
And the thing led is so because it is being led, and the thing seen because it is being seen?
It is not being seen because it is a thing seen but on the contrary it is a thing seen because it is being seen; nor is it because it is something led that it is being led but because it is being led that it is something led; nor is something being carried because it is something carried, but it is something carried because it is being carried.
Is what I want to say clear, Euthyphro?
I want to say this, namely, that if anything is being changed Euthyphro or is being affected in any way, it is not being changed because it is something changed, but rather it is something changed because it is being changed; nor is it being affected because it is something affected, but it is something affected because it is being affected.
Or do you not agree?
Is something loved either something changed or something affected by something?
So it is in the same case as the things just mentioned; it is not being loved by those who love it because it is something loved, but it is something loved because it is being loved by them?
What then do we say about the pious, Euthyphro?
Surely that it is being loved by all the gods, according to what you say?
Is it being loved because it is pious, or for some other reason?
For no other reason.
It is being loved then because it is pious, but it is not pious because it is being loved?
And yet it is something loved and god loved because it is being loved by the gods?
Then the god loved is not the same as the pious, Euthyphro, nor the pious the same as the god loved, as you say it is, but one differs from the other.
Because we agree that the pious is being loved for this reason, that it is pious, but it is not pious because it is being loved.
And that the god loved, on the other hand, is so because it is being loved by the gods, by the very fact of being loved, but it is not being loved because it is god loved.
But if the god loved and the pious were the same, my dear Euthyphro, then if the pious was being loved because it was pious, the god loved would also be being loved because it was god loved; and if the god loved was god loved because it was being loved by the gods, then.
Here Socrates gives the general principle under which, he says, the specific cases already examined those of leading, carrying, and seeing all fall.
It is by being changed by something that changes it (e.g. by carrying it somewhere) that anything is a changed thing not vice versa: it is not by something's being a changed thing that something else then changes it so that it comes to be being changed (e.g. by carrying it somewhere).
Likewise for 'affections' such as being seen by someone: it is by being 'affected' by something that 'affects' it that anything is an 'affected' thing, not vice versa.
It is not by being an 'affected' thing (e.g., a thing seen) that something else then 'affects' it.
Euthyphro the pious would also be pious because it was being loved by the gods.
But now you see that they are in opposite cases as being altogether different from each other: the one is such as to be loved because it is being loved, the other is being loved because it is such as to be loved.
I'm afraid, Euthyphro, that when you were asked what piety is, you did not wish to make its nature clear to me, but you told me an affect or quality of it, that the pious has the quality of being loved by all the gods, but you have not yet told me what the pious is.
Now, if you will, do not hide things from me but tell me again from the beginning
what piety is, whether being loved by the gods or having some other quality we shall not quarrel about that but be keen to tell me what the pious and the impious are.
But Socrates, I have no way of telling you what I have in mind, for whatever proposition we put forward goes around and refuses to stay put where we establish it.
Your statements, Euthyphro, seem to belong to my ancestor, Daedalus.
If I were stating them and putting them forward, you would perhaps be making fun of me and say that because of my kinship with him my conclusions in discussion run away and will not stay where one puts them.
As these propositions are yours, however, we need some other jest, for they will not stay put for you, as you say yourself.
I think the same jest will do for our discussion, Socrates, for I am not the one who makes them go round and not remain in the same place; it is you who are the Daedalus; for as far as I am concerned they would remain as they were.
It looks as if I was cleverer than Daedalus in using my skill, my friend, in so far as he could only cause to move the things he made himself, but I can make other people's move as well as my own.
And the smartest part of my skill is that I am clever without wanting to be, for I would rather have your statements to me remain unmoved than possess the wealth of Tantalus as well as the cleverness of Daedalus.
Since I think you are making unnecessary difficulties, I am as eager as you are to find a way to teach me about piety, and do not give up before you do.
See whether you think all that is pious is of necessity just.
And is then all that is just pious?
Or is all that is pious just, but not all that is just pious, but some of it is and some is not?
I do not follow what you are saying, Socrates.
Yet you are younger than I by as much as you are wiser.
As I say, you are making difficulties because of your wealth of wisdom.
Pull yourself together, my dear sir, what I am saying is not difficult to grasp.
I am saying the opposite of what the poet said who wrote: You do not wish to name Zeus, who had done it, and who made all things grow, for where there is fear there is also shame.
I disagree with the poet.
Shall I tell you why?
I do not think that 'where there is fear there is also shame,'
for I think that many people who fear disease and poverty and many other such things feel fear, but are not ashamed of the things they fear.
But where there is shame there is also fear.
For is there anyone who, in feeling shame and embarrassment at anything, does not also at the same time fear and dread a reputation for wickedness?
He is certainly afraid.
It is then not right to say 'where there is fear there is also shame,' but that where there is shame there is also fear, for fear covers a larger area than shame.
Shame is a part of fear just as odd is a part of number, with the result that it is not true that where there is number there is also oddness, but that where there is oddness there is also number.
Do you follow me now?
This is the kind of thing I was asking before, whether where there is piety there is also justice, but where there is justice there is not always piety, for the pious is a part of justice.
Shall we say that, or do you think otherwise?
No, but like that, for what you say appears to be right.
: if the pious is a part of the just, we must, it seems, find out what part of the just it is.
Now if you asked me something of what we mentioned just now, such as what part of number is the even, and what number that is, I would say it is the number that is divisible into two equal, not unequal, parts.
Try in this way to tell me what part of the just the pious is, in order to tell Meletus not to wrong us any more and not to indict me for ungodliness, since I have learned from you sufficiently what is godly and pious and what is not.
I think, Socrates, that the godly and pious is the part of the just that is concerned with the care of the gods, while that concerned with the care of men is the remaining part of justice.
You seem to me to put that very well, but I still need a bit of information.
I do not know yet what you mean by care, for you do not mean the care of the gods in the same sense as the care of other things, as, for example, we say, don't we
, that not everyone knows how to care for horses, but the horse breeder does.
Yes, I do mean it that way.
So horse breeding is the care of horses.
Nor does everyone know how to care for dogs, but the hunter does.
So hunting is the care of dogs.
And cattle raising is the care of cattle.
While piety and godliness is the care of the gods, Euthyphro.
Now care in each case has the same effect; it aims at the good and the benefit of the object cared for, as you can see that horses cared for by horse breeders are benefited and become better.
So dogs are benefited by dog breeding, cattle by cattle raising, and so with all the others.
Or do you think that care aims to harm the object of its care?
It aims to benefit the object of its care?
Is piety then, which is the care of the gods, also to benefit the gods and make them better?
Would you agree that when you do something pious you make some one of the gods better?
Nor do I think that this is what you mean far from it
but that is why I asked you what you meant by the care of gods, because I did not believe you meant this kind of care.
Quite right, Socrates, that is not the kind of care
Very well, but what kind of care of the gods would piety be?
The kind of care, Socrates, that slaves take of their masters.
It is likely to be a kind of service of the gods.
Could you tell me to the achievement of what goal service to doctors tends?
Is it not, do you think, to achieving health?
What about service to shipbuilders?
To what achievement is it directed?
Clearly, Socrates, to the building of a ship.
And service to housebuilders to the building of a house?
Tell me then, my good sir, to the achievement of what aim does service to the gods tend?
You obviously know since you say that you, of all men, have the best knowledge of the divine.
And I am telling the truth, Socrates.
Tell me then, by Zeus, what is that excellent aim that the gods achieve, using us as their servants?
Many fine things, Socrates.
So do generals, my friend.
Nevertheless you could easily tell me their main concern, which is to achieve victory in war, is it not?
The farmers too, I think, achieve many fine things, but the main point of their efforts is to produce food from the earth.
Well then, how would you sum up the many fine things that the gods achieve?
I told you a short while ago, Socrates, that it is a considerable task to acquire any precise knowledge of these things, but, to put it simply
, I say that if a man knows how to say and do what is pleasing to the gods at prayer and sacrifice, those are pious actions such as preserve both private houses and public affairs of state.
The opposite of these pleasing actions are impious and overturn and destroy everything.
You could tell me in far fewer words, if you were willing, the sum of what I asked, Euthyphro, but you are not keen to teach me, that is clear.
You were on the point of doing so, but you turned away.
If you had given that answer, I should now have acquired from you sufficient knowledge of the nature of piety.
As it is, the lover of inquiry must follow his beloved wherever it may lead him.
Once more then, what do you say that piety and the pious are?
Are they a knowledge of how to sacrifice and pray?
To sacrifice is to make a gift to the gods, whereas to pray is to beg from the gods?
Definitely, Socrates.
It would follow from this statement that piety would be a knowledge of how to give to, and beg from, the gods.
You understood what I said very well, Socrates.
That is because I am so desirous of your wisdom, and I concentrate my mind on it, so that no word of yours may fall to the ground.
But tell me, what is this service to the gods?
You say it is to beg from them and to give to them?
And to beg correctly would be to ask from them things that we need?
And to give correctly is to give them what they need from us, for it would not be skillful to bring gifts to anyone that are in no way needed.
Piety would then be a sort of trading skill between gods and men?
yes, if you prefer to call it that.
I prefer nothing, unless it is true.
But tell me, what benefit do the gods derive from the gifts they receive from us?
What they give us is Euthyphro obvious to all.
There is for us no good that we do not receive from them, but how are they benefited by what they receive from us?
Or do we have such an advantage over them in the trade that we receive all our blessings from them
and they receive nothing from us?
Do you suppose, Socrates, that the gods are benefited by what they receive from us?
What could those gifts from us to the gods be, Euthyphro?
What else, do you think, than honor, reverence, and what I mentioned just now, to please them?
The pious is then, Euthyphro, pleasing to the gods, but not beneficial or dear to them?
I think it is of all things most dear to them.
So the pious is once again what is dear to the gods.
When you say this, will you be surprised if your arguments seem to move about instead of staying put?
And will you accuse me of being Daedalus who makes them move, though you are yourself much more skillful than Daedalus and make them go round in a circle?
Or do you not realize that our argument has moved around and come again to the same place?
You surely remember that earlier the pious and the godloved were shown not to be the same but different from each other.
Or do you not remember?
Do you then not realize now that you are saying that what is dear to the gods is the pious?
Is this not the same as the god loved?
Either we were wrong when we agreed before, or, if we were right then, we are wrong now.
That seems to be so.
So we must investigate again from the beginning what piety is, as I shall not willingly give up before I learn this.
Do not think me unworthy, but concentrate your attention and tell the truth.
For you know it, if any man does, and I must not let you go, like Proteus, before you tell me.
If you had no clear knowledge of piety and impiety you would never have ventured to prosecute your old father for murder on behalf of a servant.
For fear of the gods you would have been afraid to take the risk lest you should not be acting rightly, and would have been ashamed before men, but now I know well
that you believe you have clear knowledge of piety and impiety.
So tell me, my good Euthyphro, and do not hide what you think it is.
Some other time, Socrates, for I am in a hurry now, and it is time for me to go.
What a thing to do, my friend!
By going you have cast me down from a great hope I had, that I would learn from you the nature of the pious and the impious and so escape Meletus' indictment by showing him that I had acquired wisdom in divine matters from Euthyphro, and my ignorance would no longer cause me to be careless and inventive about such things, and that I would be better for the rest of my life.
Actually, the word means not an apology but a defense speech in a legal proceeding, and that is what we get certainly, Socrates does not apologize for anything!
This is not really a dialogue.
At the age of seventy he had been indicted for breaking the law against 'impiety' for offending the Olympian gods (Zeus, Apollo, and the rest) recognized in the city's festivals and other official activities.
The basis of the charge, such as it was, lay in the way that, for many years, Socrates had been carrying on his philosophical work in Athens.
It has often been thought that the real basis for it lay in 'guilt by association':
several of Socrates' known associates had been prominent malfeasants in Athens' defeat in the Peloponnesian War only a few years earlier and the oligarchic reign of terror that followed; but an amnesty had forbidden suits based on political offenses during that time.
After all, these would be the ultimate basis on which he should or should not be found guilty of anything.
He argues that, so far from offending the gods through his philosophizing, or showing disbelief in them, he has piously followed their lead (particularly that of Apollo, through his oracle at Delphi) in making himself as good a person as he can and encouraging (even goading) others to do the same.
The gods want, more than anything else, that we shall be good, and goodness depends principally upon the quality of our understanding of what to care about and how to behave in our lives: philosophy, through Socratic discussion, is the pursuit of that understanding.
This is, of course, no record of the actual defense Socrates mounted at his trial in.
we have no way of knowing how closely, if at all, it conforms to Socrates' real speech.
Was Socrates nonetheless guilty as charged?
As we see also from Euthyphro, he has no truck with the authority of myths or ancient poets or religious tradition and 'divination' to tell us what to think about the gods and their commands or wishes as regards ourselves.
In democratic Athens, juries were randomly selected subsets representatives of the whole people.
Hence, as Socrates makes clear, he is addressing the democratic people of Athens, and when the jury find him guilty and condemn him to death, they act as and for the Athenian people.
Did Socrates bring on his own condemnation, whether wittingly or not, by refusing to say the sorts of things and to comport himself in the sort of way that would have won his acquittal?
True to his philosophical calling, he requires that the Athenians think, honestly and dispassionately, and decide the truth of the charges by reasoning from the facts as they actually were.
This was his final challenge to them to care more for their souls their minds, their power of reason than for their peace and comfort, undisturbed by the likes of him.
I do not know, men of Athens, how my accusers affected you; as for me, I was almost carried away in spite of myself, so persuasively did they speak.
And yet, hardly anything of what they said is true.
Of the many lies they told, one in particular surprised me, namely that you should be careful not to be deceived by an accomplished speaker like me.
That they were not ashamed to be immediately proved wrong by the facts, when I show myself not to be an accomplished speaker at all, that I thought was most shameless on their part unless indeed they call an accomplished speaker
the man who speaks the truth.
If they mean that, I would agree that I am an orator, but not after their manner, for indeed, as I say, practically nothing they said was true.
From me you will hear the whole truth, though not, by Zeus, gentlemen, expressed in embroidered and stylized phrases like theirs, but things spoken at random and expressed in the first words that come to mind, for I put my trust in the justice of what I say, and let none of you expect anything else.
It would not be fitting at my age, as it might be for a young man, to toy with words when I appear before you.
One thing I do ask and beg of you, gentlemen: if you hear me making my defense in the same kind of language as I am accustomed to use in the marketplace by the bankers' tables, where many of you have heard me, and elsewhere, do not be surprised or create a disturbance on that account.
The position is this
: this is my first appearance in a lawcourt, at the age of seventy; I am therefore simply a stranger to the manner of speaking here.
Just as if I were really a stranger, you would certainly excuse me if I spoke in that dialect and manner in which I had been brought up, so too my present request seems a just one, for you to pay no attention to my manner of speech be it better or worse but to concentrate your attention on whether what I say is just or not, for the excellence of a judge lies in this, as that of a speaker lies in telling the truth.
It is right for me, gentlemen, to defend myself first against the first lying accusations made against me and my first accusers, and then against the later accusations and the later accusers.
There have been many who have accused me to you for many years now, and none of their accusations are true.
These I fear much more than I fear Anytus and his friends, though they too are formidable.
These earlier ones, however, are more so, gentlemen; they got hold of most of you from childhood, persuaded you and accused me quite falsely, saying that there is a man called Socrates, a wise man, a student of all things in the sky and below the earth, who makes the worse argument the stronger.
Those who spread that rumor, gentlemen, are my dangerous accusers, for their hearers believe that those who study these things do not even believe in the gods.
Moreover, these accusers are numerous, and have been at it a long time; also, they spoke to you at an age when you would most readily believe them, some of you being children and adolescents, and they won their case by default, as there was no defense.
What is most absurd in all this is that one cannot even know or mention their names unless one of them is a writer of comedies.
Those who maliciously and slanderously persuaded you who also, when persuaded themselves then persuaded others all those are most difficult to deal with: one cannot bring one of them into court or refute him; one must simply fight with shadows, as it were, in making one's defense, and crossexamine when no one answers.
I want you to realize too that my accusers are of two kinds: those who have accused me recently, and the old ones I mention; and to think that I must first defend myself against the latter, for you have also heard their accusations first, and to a much greater extent than the more recent.
Very well then, men of Athens.
I must surely defend myself and attempt to uproot from your minds in so short a time the slander that has resided there so long.
I wish this may happen, if it is in any way better for you and me, and that my defense may be successful, but I think this is very difficult and I am fully aware of how difficult it is.
Even so, let the matter proceed as the god may wish, but I must obey the law and make my defense.
Let us then take up the case from its beginning.
What is the accusation from which arose the slander in which Meletus trusted when he wrote.
This is Aristophanes.
Socrates refers below c) to the character Socrates in his Clouds ff.)
, first produced in.
the charge against me?
What did they say when they slandered me?
I must, as if they were my actual prosecutors, read the affidavit they would have sworn.
It goes something like this: Socrates is guilty of wrongdoing in that he busies himself studying things in the sky and below the earth; he makes the worse into the stronger argument, and he teaches these same things to others.
You have seen this yourself in the comedy of Aristophanes, a Socrates swinging about there, saying he was walking on air and talking a lot of other nonsense about things of which I know nothing at all.
I do not speak in contempt of such knowledge, if someone is wise in these things lest Meletus bring more cases against me
but, gentlemen, I have no part in it, and on this point I call upon the majority of you as witnesses.
I think it right that all those of you who have heard me conversing, and many of you have, should tell each other if anyone of you has ever heard me discussing such subjects to any extent at all.
From this you will learn that the other things said about me by the majority are of the same kind.
Not one of them is true.
And if you have heard from anyone that I undertake to teach people and charge a fee for it, that is not true either.
Yet I think it a fine thing to be able to teach people as Gorgias of Leontini does, and Prodicus of Ceos, and Hippias of Elis.
Each of these men can go to any city and persuade the young, who can keep company with anyone of their own fellow citizens they want without paying, to leave the company of these, to join with themselves, pay them a fee, and be grateful to them besides.
Indeed, I learned that there is another wise man from Paros who is visiting us, for I met a man who has spent more money on than everybody else put together, Callias, the son of Hipponicus.
So I asked him he has two sons 'Callias,' I said, 'if your sons were colts or calves, we could find and engage a supervisor for them who would make them excel in their proper qualities, some horse breeder or farmer.
Now since they are men, whom do you have in mind to supervise them?
Who is an expert in this kind of excellence, the human and social kind?
I think you must have given thought to this since you have sons.
Is there such a person,' I asked, 'or is there not?' '
Certainly there is,' he said. '
I asked, 'What is his name, where is he from?
and what is his fee?' '
His name, Socrates, is Evenus, he comes from Paros, and his fee is five minas.'
I thought Evenus a happy man, if he really possesses this art, and teaches for so moderate a fee.
Certainly I would pride and preen myself if I had this knowledge, but I do not have it, gentlemen.
One of you might perhaps interrupt me and say: 'But Socrates, what is your occupation?
From where have these slanders come?
For surely if you did not busy yourself with something out of the common, all these rumors and talk would not have arisen unless you did something other than most people.
Tell us what it is, that we may not speak inadvisedly about you.'
Anyone who says that seems to be right, and I will try to show you what.
These were all well known.
has caused this reputation and slander.
Perhaps some of you will think I am jesting, but be sure that all that I shall say is true.
What has caused my reputation is none other than a certain kind of wisdom.
What kind of wisdom?
Human wisdom, perhaps.
It may be that I really possess this, while those whom I mentioned just now are wise with a wisdom more than human; else I cannot explain it, for I certainly do not possess it, and whoever says I do is lying and speaks to slander me.
Do not create a disturbance, gentlemen, even if you think I am boasting, for the story I shall tell does not originate with me, but I will refer you to a trustworthy source.
I shall call upon the god at Delphi as witness to the existence and nature of my wisdom, if it be such.
You know Chaerephon.
He was my friend from youth, and the friend of most of you, as he shared your exile and your return.
You surely know the kind of man he was, how impulsive in any course of action.
He went to Delphi at one time and ventured to ask the oracle as I say, gentlemen, do not create a disturbance he asked if any man was wiser than I, and the Pythian replied that no one was wiser.
Chaerephon is dead, but his brother will testify to you about this.
Consider that I tell you this because I would inform you about the origin of the slander.
When I heard of this reply I asked myself: 'Whatever does the god mean?
I am very conscious that I am not wise at all; what then does he mean by saying that I am the wisest?
For surely he does not lie; it is not legitimate for him to do so.'
For a long time I was at a loss as to his meaning; then I very reluctantly turned to some such investigation as this; I went to one of those reputed wise, thinking that there, if anywhere, I could refute the oracle and say to it: 'This man is wiser than I, but you said I was.'
Then, when I examined this man there is no need for me to tell you his name, he was one of our public men
my experience was something like this: I thought that he appeared wise to many people and especially to himself, but he was not.
I then tried to show him that he thought himself wise, but that he was not.
As a result he came to dislike me, and so did many of the bystanders.
So I withdrew and thought to myself: 'I am wiser than this man; it is likely that neither of us knows anything worthwhile, but he thinks he knows something when he does not, whereas when I do not know, neither do I think I know; so I am likely to be wiser than he to this small extent, that I do not think I know what I do not know.'
After this I approached another man, one of those thought to be wiser than he, and I thought the same thing, and so I came to be disliked both by him and by many others.
After that I proceeded systematically.
I realized, to my sorrow and alarm, that I was getting unpopular, but I thought that I must attach the greatest importance to the god's oracle, so I must go to all those who had any reputation for knowledge to examine its meaning.
And by the dog, men of Athens for I must tell you the truth I experienced something like this: in my investigation in the service of the god I found that those who had the highest reputation were nearly the most deficient, while those who were thought to be inferior were more knowledgeable.
I must give you an account of my journeyings as if they were labors I had undertaken to prove the oracle irrefutable.
After the politicians, I went to the poets, the writers of tragedies and dithyrambs and the others, intending in their case to catch myself being more ignorant than they.
So I took up those poems with which they seemed to have taken most trouble and asked them what they meant, in order that I might at the same time learn something from them.
I am ashamed to tell you the truth, gentlemen, but I must.
Almost all the bystanders might have explained the poems better than their authors could.
I soon realized that poets do not compose their poems with knowledge, but by some inborn talent and by inspiration, like seers and prophets who also say many fine things without any understanding of what they say.
The poets seemed to me to have had a similar experience.
At the same time I saw that, because of their poetry, they thought themselves very wise men in other respects, which they were not.
So there again I withdrew, thinking that I had the same advantage over them as I had over the politicians.
Finally I went to the craftsmen, for I was conscious of knowing practically nothing, and I knew that I would find that they had knowledge of many fine things.
In this I was not mistaken; they knew things I did not know, and to that extent they were wiser than I.
But, men of Athens, the good craftsmen seemed to me to have the same fault as the poets:
each of them, because of his success at his craft, thought himself very wise in other most important pursuits, and this error of theirs overshadowed the wisdom they had, so that I asked myself, on behalf of the oracle, whether I should prefer to be as I am, with neither their wisdom nor their ignorance, or to have both.
The answer I gave myself and the oracle was that it was to my advantage to be as I am.
As a result of this investigation, men of Athens, I acquired much unpopularity, of a kind that is hard to deal with and is a heavy burden; many slanders came from these people and a reputation for wisdom, for in each case the bystanders thought that I myself possessed the wisdom that I proved that my interlocutor did not have.
What is probable, gentlemen, is that in fact the god is wise and that his oracular response meant that human wisdom is worth little or nothing, and that when he says this man, Socrates, he is using my name as an example, as if he said: 'This man among you, mortals, is wisest who, like Socrates, understands that his wisdom is worthless.'
So even now I continue this investigation as the god bade me
and I go around seeking out anyone, citizen or stranger, whom I think wise.
Then if I do not think he is, I come to the assistance of the god and show him that he is not wise.
Because of this occupation, I do not have the leisure to engage in public affairs to any extent, nor indeed to look after my own, but I live in great poverty because of my service to the god.
Furthermore, the young men who follow me around of their own free will, those who have most leisure, the sons of the very rich, take pleasure in hearing people questioned; they themselves often imitate me and try to question others.
I think they find an abundance of men who believe they have some knowledge but know little or nothing.
The result is that those whom they question are angry, not with themselves but with me.
They say: 'That man Socrates is a pestilential fellow who corrupts the young.'
If one asks them what he does and what he teaches to corrupt them, they are silent, as they do not know, but, so as not to appear at a loss, they mention those accusations that are available against all philosophers, about 'things in the sky and things below the earth,' about 'not believing in the gods' and 'making the worse the stronger argument'; they would not want to tell the truth, I'm sure, that they have been proved to lay claim to knowledge when they know nothing.
These people are ambitious, violent and numerous; they are continually and convincingly talking about me; they have been filling your ears for a long time with vehement slanders against me.
From them Meletus attacked me, and Anytus and Lycon, Meletus being vexed on behalf of the poets, Anytus on behalf of the craftsmen and the politicians, Lycon on behalf of the orators, so that, as I started out by saying, I should be surprised if I could rid you of so much slander in so short a time.
That, men of Athens, is the truth for you.
I have hidden or disguised nothing.
I know well enough that this very conduct makes me unpopular, and this is proof that what I say is true, that such is the slander against me, and that such are its causes.
If you look into this either now or later, this is what you will find.
Let this suffice as a defense against the charges of my earlier accusers.
After this I shall try to defend myself against Meletus, that good and patriotic man, as he says he is, and my later accusers.
As these are a different lot of accusers, let us again take up their sworn deposition.
It goes something like this: Socrates is guilty of corrupting the young and of not believing in the gods in whom the city believes, but in other new spiritual things.
Such is their charge.
Let us examine it point by point.
He says that I am guilty of corrupting the young, but I say that Meletus is guilty of dealing frivolously with serious matters, of irresponsibly bringing people into court, and of professing to be seriously concerned with things about none of which he has ever cared, and I shall try to prove that this is so.
Come here and tell me, Meletus.
Surely you consider it of the greatest importance that our young men be as good as possible?
Come then, tell these men who improves them.
You obviously know, in view of your concern.
You say you have discovered the one who corrupts them, namely me, and you bring me here and accuse me to these men.
Come, inform them and tell them who it is.
You see, Meletus, that you are silent and know not what to say.
Does this not seem shameful to you and a sufficient proof of what I say, that you have not been concerned with any of this?
Tell me, my good sir, who improves our young men?
That is not what I am asking, but what person who has knowledge of the laws to begin with?
These jurymen, Socrates.
How do you mean, Meletus?
Are these able to educate the young and improve them?
All of them, or some but not others?
You mention a great abundance of benefactors.
But what about the audience?
Do they improve the young or not?
What about the members of Council?
The Councillors, also.
But, Meletus, what about the assembly?
Do members of the assembly corrupt the young, or do they all improve them?
All the Athenians, it seems, make the young into fine good men, except me, and I alone corrupt them.
That is most definitely what I mean.
You condemn me to a great misfortune.
Tell me: does this also apply to horses
That all men improve them and one individual corrupts them?
Or is quite the contrary true, one individual is able to improve them, or very few, namely, the horse breeders, whereas the majority, if they have horses and use them, corrupt them?
Is that not the case, Meletus, both with horses and all other animals?
Of course it is, whether you and Anytus say so or not.
It would be a very happy state of affairs if only one person corrupted our youth, while the others improved them.
You have made it sufficiently obvious, Meletus, that you have never had any concern for our youth; you show your indifference clearly; that you have given no thought to the subjects about which you bring me to trial.
And by Zeus, Meletus, tell us also whether it is better for a man to live among good or wicked fellow citizens.
Answer, my good man, for I am not asking a difficult question.
Do not the wicked do some harm to those who are ever closest to them, whereas good people benefit them?
And does the man exist who would rather be harmed than benefited by his associates?
Answer, my good sir, for the law orders you to answer.
Is there any man who wants to be harmed?
Come now, do you accuse me here of corrupting the young and making them worse deliberately or unwillingly?
What follows, Meletus?
Are you so much wiser at your age than I am at mine that you understand that wicked people always do some harm to their closest neighbors while good people do them good, but I have reached such a pitch of ignorance that I do not realize this, namely that if I make one of my associates wicked
I run the risk of being harmed by him so that I do such a great evil deliberately, as you say?
I do not believe you, Meletus, and I do not think anyone else will.
Either I do not corrupt the young or, if I do, it is unwillingly, and you are lying in either case.
Now if I corrupt them unwillingly, the law does not require you to bring people to court for such unwilling wrongdoings, but to get hold of them privately, to instruct them and exhort them; for clearly, if I learn better, I shall cease to do what I am doing unwillingly.
You, however, have avoided my company and were unwilling to instruct me, but you bring me here, where the law requires one to bring those who are in need of punishment, not of instruction.
And so, men of Athens, what I said is clearly true:
Meletus has never been at all concerned with these matters.
Nonetheless tell us, Meletus, how you say that I corrupt the young; or is it obvious from your deposition that it is by teaching them not to believe in the gods in whom the city believes but in other new spiritual things?
Is this not what you say I teach and so corrupt them?
That is most certainly what I do say.
Then by those very gods about whom we are talking, Meletus, make this clearer to me and to these men: I cannot be sure whether you mean that I teach the belief that there are some gods and therefore I myself believe that there are gods and am not altogether an atheist, nor am I guilty of that not, however, the gods in whom the city believes, but others, and that this is the charge against me, that they are others.
Or whether you mean that I do not believe in gods at all, and that this is what I teach to others.
This is what I mean, that you do not believe in gods at all.
You are a strange fellow, Meletus.
Why do you say this?
Do I not believe, as other men do, that the sun and the moon are gods?
No, by Zeus, gentlemen of the jury, for he says that the sun is stone, and the moon earth.
My dear Meletus, do you think you are prosecuting Anaxagoras?
Are you so contemptuous of these men and think them so ignorant of letters as not to know that the books of Anaxagoras of Clazomenae are full of those theories, and further, that the young men learn from me what they can buy from time to time for a drachma, at most, in the bookshops, and ridicule Socrates if he pretends that these theories are his own, especially as they are so absurd?
Is that, by Zeus, what you think of me, Meletus, that I do not believe that there are any gods?
That is what I say, that you do not believe in the gods at all.
You cannot be believed, Meletus, even, I think, by yourself.
The man appears to me, men of Athens, highly insolent and uncontrolled.
He seems to have made this deposition out of insolence, violence and youthful zeal.
He is like one who composed a riddle and is trying it out: 'Will the wise Socrates realize that I am jesting and contradicting myself, or shall I deceive him and others?'
I think he contradicts himself in the affidavit, as if he said: 'Socrates is guilty of not believing in gods but believing in gods,' and surely that is the part of a jester!
Examine with me, gentlemen, how he appears to contradict himself, and you, Meletus, answer us.
Remember, gentlemen, what I asked you when I began, not to create a disturbance if I proceed in my usual manner.
Does any man, Meletus, believe in human activities who does not believe in humans?
Make him answer, and not again and again create a disturbance.
Does any man who does not believe in horses believe in horsemen's activities?
Or in flute playing activities but not in flute players?
No, my good sir, no man could.
If you are not willing to answer, I will tell you and these men.
Answer the next question, however.
Does any man believe in spiritual activities who does not believe in spirits?
Thank you for answering, if reluctantly, when these gentlemen made you.
Now you say that I believe in spiritual things and teach about them, whether new or old, but at any rate spiritual things according to what you say, and to this you have sworn in your deposition.
But if I believe in spiritual things I must quite inevitably believe in spirits.
I shall assume that you agree, as you do not answer.
Do we not believe spirits to be either gods or the children of gods?
Then since I do believe in spirits, as you admit, if spirits are gods, this is what I mean when I say you speak in riddles and in jest, as you state that I do not believe in gods and then again that I do, since I do believe in spirits.
If on the other hand the spirits are children of the gods, bastard children of the gods by nymphs or some other mothers, as they are said to be, what man would believe children of the gods to exist, but not gods?
That would be just as absurd as to believe the young of horses and asses, namely mules, to exist, but not to believe in the existence of horses and asses.
You must have made this deposition, Meletus, either to test us or because you were at a loss to find any true wrongdoing of which to accuse me.
There is no way in which you could persuade anyone of even small intelligence that it is possible for one and the same man to believe in spiritual but not also in divine things, and then again for that same man to believe neither in spirits nor in gods nor in heroes.
I do not think, men of Athens, that it requires a prolonged defense to prove that I am not guilty of the charges in Meletus' deposition, but this is sufficient.
On the other hand, you know that what I said earlier is true, that I am very unpopular with many people.
This will be my undoing, if I am undone, not Meletus or Anytus but the slanders and envy of many people.
This has destroyed many other good men and will, I think, continue to do so.
There is no danger that it will stop at me.
Someone might say: 'Are you not ashamed, Socrates, to have followed the kind of occupation that has led to your being now in danger of death?'
However, I should be right to reply to him: 'You are wrong,
sir, if you think that a man who is any good at all should take into account the risk of life or death; he should look to this only in his actions, whether what he does is right or wrong, whether he is acting like a good or a bad man.'
According to your view, all the heroes who died at Troy were inferior people, especially the son of Thetis who was so contemptuous of danger compared with disgrace.
When he was eager to kill Hector, his goddess mother warned him, as I believe, in some such words as these: '
My child, if you avenge the death of your comrade, Patroclus, and you kill Hector, you will die yourself, for your death is to follow immediately after Hector's.'
Hearing this, he despised death and danger and was much more afraid to live a coward who did not avenge his friends. '
Let me die at once,' he said, 'when once I have given the wrongdoer his deserts, rather than.
remain here, a laughingstock by the curved ships, a burden upon the earth.'
Do you think he gave thought to death and danger?
This is the truth of the matter, men of Athens: wherever a man has taken a position that he believes to be best, or has been placed by his commander, there he must I think remain and face danger, without a thought for death or anything else, rather than disgrace.
It would have been a dreadful way to behave, men of Athens,
if, at Potidaea, Amphipolis and Delium, I had, at the risk of death, like anyone else, remained at my post where those you had elected to command had ordered me, and then, when the god ordered me, as I thought and believed, to live the life of a philosopher, to examine myself and others, I had abandoned my post for fear of death or anything else.
That would have been a dreadful thing, and then I might truly have justly been brought here for not believing that there are gods, disobeying the oracle, fearing death, and thinking I was wise when I was not.
To fear death, gentlemen, is no other than to think oneself wise when one is not, to think one knows what one does not know.
No one knows whether death may not be the greatest of all blessings for a man, yet men fear it as if they knew that it is the greatest of evils.
And surely it is the most blameworthy ignorance to believe that one knows what one does not know.
It is perhaps on this point and in this respect, gentlemen, that I differ from the majority of men, and if I were to claim that I am wiser than anyone in anything, it would be in this, that, as I have no adequate knowledge of things in the underworld, so I do not think I have.
I do know, however, that it is wicked and shameful to do wrong, to disobey one's superior
I shall never fear or avoid things of which I do not know, whether they may not be good rather than things that I know to be bad.
Even if you acquitted me now and did not believe Anytus, who said to you that either I should not have been brought here in the first place, or that now I am here, you cannot avoid executing me, for if I should be acquitted, your sons would practice the teachings of Socrates and all be thoroughly corrupted
; if you said to me in this regard: 'Socrates, we do not believe Anytus now; we acquit you, but only on condition that you spend no more time on this investigation and do not practice philosophy, and if you are caught doing so you will die;' if, as I say, you were to acquit me on those terms, I would say to you: 'Men of Athens, I am grateful and I am your friend, but I will obey the god rather than you, and as long as I draw breath and am able, I shall not cease to practice philosophy, to exhort you and in my usual way to point out to any one of you whom I happen to meet: '
Good Sir, you are an Athenian, a citizen of the greatest city with the greatest reputation for both wisdom and power; are you not ashamed of your eagerness to possess as much wealth, reputation and honors as possible, while you do not care for nor give thought to wisdom or truth, or the best possible state of your soul?'
Then, if one of you disputes this and says he does care, I shall not let him go at once or leave him, but I shall question him, examine him and test him, and if I do not think he has attained the goodness that he says he has, I shall reproach him because he attaches little importance to the most important things and greater importance to inferior things.
I shall treat in this way
anyone I happen to meet, young and old, citizen and stranger, and more so the citizens because you are more kindred to me.
Be sure that this is what the god orders me to do, and I think there is no greater blessing for the city than my service to the god.
For I go around doing nothing but persuading both young and old among you not to care for your body or your wealth in preference to or as strongly as for the best possible state of your soul, as I say to you: Wealth does not bring about excellence, but excellence makes wealth and everything else good for men, both individually and collectively.'
Now if by saying this I corrupt the young, this advice must be harmful, but if anyone says that I give different advice, he is talking nonsense.
On this point I would say to you, men of Athens: 'Whether you believe Anytus or not, whether you acquit me or not, do so on the understanding that this is my course of action, even if I am to face death many times.'
Do not create a disturbance, gentlemen, but abide by my request not to cry out at what I say but to listen, for I think it will be to your advantage to listen, and I am about to say other things at which you will perhaps cry out.
By no means do this.
Be sure that if you kill the sort of man I say I am, you will not harm me more than yourselves.
Neither Meletus nor Anytus can harm me in any way; he could not harm me, for I do not think it is permitted that a better man be harmed by a worse; certainly he might kill me, or perhaps banish or disfranchise me, which he and maybe others think to be great harm, but I do not think so.
I think he is doing himself much greater harm doing what he is doing now, attempting to have a man executed unjustly.
Indeed, men of Athens, I am far from making a defense now on my own behalf, as might be thought, but on yours, to prevent you from wrongdoing by mistreating the god's gift to you by condemning me; for if you kill me you will not easily find another like me.
I was attached to this city by the god though it seems a ridiculous thing to say as upon a great and noble horse which was somewhat sluggish because of its size and needed to be stirred up by a kind of gadfly.
It is to fulfill some such function that I believe the god has placed me in the city.
I never cease to rouse each and every one of you, to persuade and reproach you all day long and everywhere
I find myself in your company.
Another such man will not easily come to be among you, gentlemen, and if you believe me you will spare me.
You might easily be annoyed with me as people are when they are aroused from a doze, and strike out at me; if convinced by Anytus you could easily kill me, and then you could sleep on for the rest of your days, unless the god, in his care for you, sent you someone else.
That I am the kind of person to be a gift of the god to the city you might realize from the fact that it does not seem.
Alternatively, this sentence could be translated: 'Wealth does not bring about excel lence, but excellence brings about wealth and all other public and private blessings for men.'
like human nature for me to have neglected all my own affairs and to have tolerated this neglect now for so many years while I was always concerned with you, approaching each one of you like a father or an elder brother to persuade you to care for virtue.
Now if I profited from this by charging a fee for my advice, there would be some sense to it, but you can see for yourselves that, for all their shameless accusations, my accusers have not been able in their impudence to bring forward a witness to say that I have ever received a fee or ever asked for one.
I, on the other hand, have a convincing witness that I speak the truth, my poverty.
It may seem strange that while I go around and give this advice privately and interfere in private affairs, I do not venture to go to the assembly
and there advise the city.
You have heard me give the reason for this in many places.
I have a divine or spiritual sign which Meletus has ridiculed in his deposition.
This began when I was a child.
It is a voice, and whenever it speaks it turns me away from something I am about to do, but it never encourages me to do anything.
This is what has prevented me from taking part in public affairs, and I think it was quite right to prevent me.
Be sure, men of Athens, that if I had long ago attempted to take part in politics, I should have died long ago, and benefited neither you nor myself.
Do not be angry with me for speaking the truth; no man will survive who genuinely opposes you or any other crowd and prevents the occurrence of many unjust and illegal happenings in the city.
A man who really fights for justice must lead a private, not a public, life if he is to survive for even a short time.
I shall give you great proofs of this, not words but what you esteem, deeds.
Listen to what happened to me, that you may know that I will not yield to any man contrary to what is right, for fear of death, even if I should die at once for not yielding.
The things I shall tell you are commonplace and smack of the lawcourts, but they are true.
I have never held any other office in the city, but I served as a member of the Council, and our tribe Antiochis was presiding at the time when you wanted to try as a body the ten generals who had failed to pick up the survivors of the naval battle.
This was illegal, as you all recognized later.
I was the only member of the presiding committee to oppose your doing something contrary to the laws, and I voted against it.
The orators were ready to prosecute me and take me away, and your shouts were egging them on, but I thought I should run any risk on the side of law and justice rather than join you, for fear of prison or death, when you were engaged in an unjust course.
This happened when the city was still a democracy.
When the oligarchy was established, the Thirty summoned me to the Hall, along with four others, and ordered us to bring Leon from Salamis, that he might be.
This was the battle of Arginusae (south of Lesbos) in .C., the last Athenian victory of the Peloponnesian war.
A violent storm prevented the Athenian generals from rescuing their survivors.
This was the harsh oligarchy that was set up after the final defeat of Athens in.
C. and ruled Athens for some nine months in before the democracy was restored.
They gave many such orders to many people, in order to implicate as many as possible in their guilt.
Then I showed again, not in words but in action
, that, if it were not rather vulgar to say so, death is something I couldn't care less about, but that my whole concern is not to do anything unjust or impious.
That government, powerful as it was, did not frighten me into any wrongdoing.
When we left the Hall, the other four went to Salamis and brought in Leon, but I went home.
I might have been put to death for this,
had not the government fallen shortly afterwards.
There are many who will witness to these events.
Do you think I would have survived all these years if I were engaged in public affairs and, acting as a good man
must, came to the help of justice and considered this the most important thing?
Far from it, men of Athens, nor would any other man.
Throughout my life, in any public activity I may have engaged in, I am the same man as I am in private life.
I have never come to an agreement with anyone to act unjustly, neither with anyone else nor with any one of those who they slanderously say are my pupils.
I have never been anyone's teacher.
If anyone, young or old, desires to listen to me when I am talking and dealing with my own concerns, I have never begrudged this to anyone, but I do not converse when I receive a fee and not when I do not.
I am equally ready to question the rich and the poor if anyone is willing to answer my questions and listen to what I say.
And I cannot justly be held responsible for the good or bad conduct of these people, as I never promised to teach them anything and have not done so.
If anyone says that he has learned anything from me, or that he heard anything privately that the others did not hear, be assured that he is not telling the truth.
Why then do some people enjoy spending considerable time in my company?
You have heard why, men of Athens; I have told you the whole truth.
They enjoy hearing those being questioned who think they are wise, but are not.
And this is not unpleasant.
To do this has, as I say, been enjoined upon me by the god, by means of oracles and dreams, and in every other way that a divine manifestation has ever ordered a man to do anything.
This is true, gentlemen, and can easily be established.
If I corrupt some young men and have corrupted others, then surely some of them who have grown older and realized that I gave them bad advice when they were young should now themselves come up here to accuse me and avenge themselves.
If they were unwilling to do so themselves, then some of their kindred, their fathers or brothers or other relations should recall it now if their family had been harmed by me.
I could mention many others, some one of whom surely Meletus should have brought in as witness in his own speech.
If he forgot to do so, then let him do it now; I will yield time if he has anything of the kind to say.
You will find quite the contrary, gentlemen.
These men are all ready to come to the help of the corruptor, the man who has harmed their kindred, as Meletus and Anytus say.
Now those who were corrupted might well have reason to help me, but the uncorrupted, their kindred who are older men, have no reason to help me except the right and proper one, that they know that Meletus is lying and that I am telling the truth.
Very well, gentlemen.
This, and maybe other similar things, is what I have to say in my defense.
Perhaps one of you might be angry as he recalls that when he himself stood trial on a less dangerous charge, he begged and implored the jurymen with many tears, that he brought his children and many of his friends and family into court to arouse as much pity as he could, but that I do none of these things, even though I may seem to be running the ultimate risk.
Thinking of this, he might feel resentful toward me and, angry about this, cast his vote in anger.
If there is such a one among you I do not deem there is, but if there is I think it would be right to say in reply:
My good sir, I too have a household and, in Homer's phrase, I am not born 'from oak or rock' but from men, so that I have a family, indeed three sons, men of Athens, of whom one is an adolescent while two are children.
Nevertheless, I will not beg you to acquit me by bringing them here.
Why do I do none of these things?
Not through arrogance, gentlemen, nor through lack of respect for you.
Whether I am brave in the face of death is another matter, but with regard to my reputation and yours and that of the whole city, it does not seem right to me to do these things, especially at my age and with my reputation.
For it is generally believed, whether it be true or false, that in certain respects Socrates is superior to the majority of men.
Now if those of you who are considered superior, be it in wisdom or courage or whatever other virtue makes them so, are seen behaving like that, it would be a disgrace.
Yet I have often seen them do this sort of thing when standing trial, men who are thought to be somebody, doing amazing things as if they thought it a terrible thing to die, and as if they were to be immortal if you did not execute them.
I think these men bring shame upon the city so that a stranger, too, would assume that those who are outstanding in virtue among the Athenians, whom they themselves select from themselves to fill offices of state and receive other honors, are in no way better than women.
You should not act like that, men of Athens, those of you who have any reputation at all, and if we do, you should not allow it.
You should make it very clear that you will more readily convict a man who performs these pitiful dramatics in court and so makes the city a laughingstock, than a man who keeps quiet.
Quite apart from the question of reputation, gentlemen, I do not think it right to supplicate the jury and to be acquitted because of this, but to teach and persuade them.
It is not the purpose of a juryman's office to give justice as a favor to whoever seems good to him, but to judge according to law, and this he has sworn to do.
We should not accustom you to perjure yourselves, nor should you make a habit of it.
This is irreverent conduct for either of us.
Do not deem it right for me, men of Athens, that I should act towards you in a way that I do not consider to be good or just or pious, especially, by Zeus, as I am being prosecuted by Meletus here for impiety; clearly, if I convinced you by my supplication to do violence to your oath of office, I would be teaching you not to believe that there are gods, and my defense would convict me of not believing in them.
This is far from being the case, gentlemen, for I do believe in them as none of my accusers do.
I leave it to you and the god to judge me in the way that will be best for me and for you.
The jury now gives its verdict of guilty, and Meletus asks for the penalty of death.
There are many other reasons for my not being angry with you for convicting me, men of Athens, and what happened was not unexpected.
I am much more surprised at the number of votes cast on each side for I
did not think the decision would be by so few votes but by a great many.
As it is, a switch of only thirty votes would have acquitted me.
I think myself that I have been cleared of Meletus' charges, and not only this, but it is clear to all that, if Anytus and Lycon had not joined him in accusing me, he would have been fined a thousand drachmas for not receiving a fifth of the votes.
He assesses the penalty at death.
What counter assessment should I propose to you, men of Athens?
Clearly it should be a penalty I deserve, and what do I deserve to suffer or to pay because I have deliberately not led a quiet life but have neglected what occupies most people: wealth, household affairs, the position of general or public orator or the other offices, the political clubs and factions that exist in the city?
I thought myself too honest to survive if I occupied myself with those things.
I did not follow that path that would have made me of no use either to you or to myself, but I went to each of you privately and conferred upon him what I say is the greatest benefit, by trying to persuade him not to care for any of his belongings before caring that he himself should be as good and as wise as possible, not to care for the city's possessions more than for the city itself, and to care for other things in the same way.
What do I deserve for being such a man?
Some good, men of Athens, if I must truly make an assessment according to my deserts, and something suitable.
What is suitable for a poor benefactor who needs leisure to exhort you?
Nothing is more suitable, gentlemen, than for such a man to be fed in the Prytaneum, much more suitable for him than for any one of you who has won a victory at Olympia with a pair or a team of horses.
The Prytaneum was the magistrates' hall or town hall of Athens in which public entertainments were given, particularly to Olympian victors on their return home.
victor makes you think yourself happy; I make you be happy.
Besides, he does not need food, but I do.
So if I must make a just assessment of what I deserve, I assess it as this: free meals in the Prytaneum.
When I say this you may think, as when I spoke of appeals to pity and entreaties, that I speak arrogantly, but that is not the case, men of Athens; rather it is like this:
I am convinced that I never willingly wrong anyone, but I am not convincing you of this, for we have talked together but a short time.
If it were the law with us, as it is elsewhere, that a trial for life should not last one but many days, you would be convinced, but now it is not easy to dispel great slanders in a short time.
Since I am convinced that I wrong no one, I am not likely to wrong myself, to say that I deserve some evil and to make some such assessment against myself.
That I should suffer the penalty Meletus has assessed against me, of which I say I do not know whether it is good or bad?
Am I then to choose in preference to this something that I know very well to be an evil and assess the penalty at that?
Why should I live in prison, always subjected to the ruling magistrates, the Eleven?
A fine, and imprisonment until I pay it?
That would be the same thing for me, as I have no money.
for perhaps you might accept that assessment.
I should have to be inordinately fond of life, men of Athens, to be so unreasonable as to suppose that other men will easily tolerate my company and conversation when you, my fellow citizens, have been unable to endure them, but found them a burden and resented them so that you are now seeking to get rid of them.
Far from it, gentlemen.
It would be a fine life at my age to be driven out of one city after another, for I know very well that wherever I go the young men will listen to my talk as they do here.
If I drive them away, they will themselves persuade their elders to drive me out; if I do not drive them away, their fathers and relations will drive me out on their behalf.
Perhaps someone might say: But Socrates, if you leave us will you not be able to live quietly, without talking?
Now this is the most difficult point on which to convince some of you.
If I say that it is impossible for me to keep quiet because that means disobeying the god, you will not believe me and will think I am being ironical.
On the other hand, if I say that it is the greatest good for a man to discuss virtue every day and those other things about which you hear me conversing and testing myself and others, for the unexamined life is not worth living for men, you will believe me even less.
What I say is true, gentlemen, but it is not easy to convince you.
At the same time, I am not accustomed to think that I deserve any penalty.
If I had money, I would assess the penalty at the amount I could pay, for that would not hurt me, but I have none, unless you are willing to set the penalty at the amount I can pay, and perhaps I could pay you one mina of silver.
So that is my assessment.
One mina was the equivalent of drachmas.
In the late fifth century one drachma was the standard daily wage of a laborer.
A mina, then, was a considerable sum.
Plato here, men of Athens, and Crito and Critobulus and Apollodorus bid me put the penalty at thirty minas, and they will stand surety for the money.
Well then, that is my assessment, and they will be sufficient guarantee of payment.
The jury now votes again and sentences Socrates to death.
It is for the sake of a short time, men of Athens, that you will acquire the reputation and the guilt, in the eyes of those who want to denigrate the city, of having killed Socrates, a wise man, for they who want to revile you will say that I am wise even if I am not.
If you had waited but a little while, this would have happened of its own accord.
You see my age, that I am already advanced in years and close to death.
I am saying this not to all of you but to those who condemned me to death, and to these same ones
Perhaps you think that I was convicted for lack of such words as might have convinced you, if I thought I should say or do all I could to avoid my sentence.
I was convicted because I lacked not words but boldness and shamelessness and the willingness to say to you what you would most gladly have heard from me, lamentations and tears and my saying and doing many things that I say are unworthy of me but that you are accustomed to hear from others.
I did not think then that the danger I ran should make me do
anything mean, nor do I now regret the nature of my defense.
I would much rather die after this kind of defense than live after making the other kind.
Neither I nor any other man should, on trial or in war, contrive to avoid death at any cost.
Indeed it is often obvious in battle that one could escape death by throwing away one's weapons and by turning to supplicate one's pursuers, and there are many ways to avoid death in every kind of danger if one will venture to do or say anything to avoid it.
It is not difficult to avoid death, gentlemen; it is much more difficult to avoid wickedness, for it runs faster than death.
Slow and elderly as I am, I have been caught by the slower pursuer, whereas my accusers, being clever and sharp, have been caught by the quicker, wickedness.
I leave you now, condemned to death by you, but they are condemned by truth to wickedness and injustice.
So I maintain my assessment, and they maintain theirs.
This perhaps had to happen, and I think it is as it should be.
Now I want to prophesy to those who convicted me, for I am at the point when men prophesy most, when they are about to die.
I say gentlemen, to those who voted to kill me, that vengeance will come upon you immediately after my death, a vengeance much harder to bear than that which you took in killing me.
You did this in the belief that you would avoid giving an account of your life, but I maintain that quite the opposite will happen to you.
There will be more people to test you, whom I now held back, but you did not notice it.
They will be more difficult to deal with as they will be younger and you will resent them more.
You are wrong if you believe that by killing people you will prevent anyone from reproaching you for not living in the right way.
To escape such tests is neither possible nor good, but it is best and easiest not to discredit others but to prepare oneself to be as good as possible.
With this prophecy to you who convicted me, I part from you.
I should be glad to discuss what has happened with those who voted for my acquittal during the time that the officers of the court are busy and I do not yet have to depart to my death.
So, gentlemen, stay with me awhile, for nothing prevents us from talking to each other while it is allowed.
To you, as being my friends, I want to show the meaning of what has occurred.
A surprising thing has happened to me, jurymen you
I would rightly call jurymen.
At all previous times my familiar prophetic power, my spiritual manifestation, frequently opposed me, even in small matters, when I was about to do something wrong, but now that, as you can see for yourselves, I was faced with what one might think, and what is generally thought to be, the worst of evils, my divine sign has not opposed me, either when I left home at dawn, or when I came into court, or at any time that I was about to say something during my speech.
Yet in other talks it often held me back in the middle of my speaking, but now it has opposed no word or deed of mine.
What do I think is the reason for this?
What has happened to me may well be a good thing, and those of us who believe death to be an evil are certainly mistaken.
I have convincing proof of this, for it is impossible that my familiar sign did not oppose me if I was not about to do what was right.
Let us reflect in this way, too, that there is good hope that death is a blessing,
for it is one of two things: either the dead are nothing and have no perception of anything, or it is, as we are told, a change and a relocating for the soul from here to another place.
If it is complete lack of perception, like a dreamless sleep, then death would be a great advantage.
For I think that if one had to pick out that night during which a man slept soundly and did not dream, put beside it the other nights and days of his life, and then see how many days and nights had been better and more pleasant than that night, not only a private person but the great king would find them easy to count compared with the other days and nights.
If death is like this I say it is an advantage, for all eternity would then seem to be no more than a single night.
If, on the other hand, death is a change from here to another place, and what we are told is true and all who have died are there, what greater blessing could there be, gentlemen of the jury?
If anyone arriving in Hades will have escaped from those who call themselves jurymen here, and will find those true jurymen who are said to sit in judgment there, Minos and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus and the other demi gods who have been upright in their own life, would that be a poor kind of change?
Again, what would one of you give to keep company with Orpheus and Musaeus, Hesiod and Homer?
I am willing to die many times if that is true.
It would be a wonderful way for me to spend my time whenever I met Palamedes and Ajax, the son of Telamon, and any other of the men of old who died through an unjust conviction, to compare my experience with theirs.
I think it would be pleasant.
Most important, I could spend my time testing and examining people there, as I do here, as to who among them is wise, and who thinks he is, but is not.
What would one not give, gentlemen of the jury, for the opportunity to examine the man who led the great expedition against Troy, or Odysseus, or Sisyphus, and innumerable other men and women one could mention?
It would be an extraordinary happiness to talk with them, to keep company with them and examine them.
In any case, they would certainly not put one to death for doing so.
They are happier there than we are here in other respects, and for the rest of time they are deathless, if indeed what we are told is true.
You too must be of good hope as regards death, gentlemen of the jury, and keep this one truth in mind, that a good man cannot be harmed either in life or in death, and that his affairs are not neglected by the gods.
What has happened to me now has not happened of itself, but it is clear to me that it was better for me to die now and to escape from trouble.
That is why my divine sign did not oppose me at any point.
So I am certainly not angry with those who convicted me, or with my accusers.
Of course that was not their purpose when they accused and convicted me, but they thought they were hurting me, and for this they deserve blame.
This much I ask from them: when my sons grow up, avenge yourselves by causing them the same kind of grief that I caused you, if you think they care for money or anything else more than they care for virtue, or if they think they are somebody when they are nobody.
Reproach them as I reproach you, that they do not care for the right things and think they are worthy when they are not worthy of anything.
If you do this, I shall have been justly treated by you, and my sons also.
Now the hour to part has come.
I go to die, you go to live.
Which of us goes to the better lot is known to no one, except the god.
As the beginning of the Phaedo relates, Socrates did not die until a month after his trial, which followed by a day the sailing of the Athenian state galley on an annual religious mission to the island of Delos; no executions were permitted during its absence.
Crito comes to tell Socrates of its anticipated arrival later that day and to make one last effort to persuade him to allow his friends to save him by bribing his jailers and bundling him off somewhere beyond the reach of Athenian law.
Crito indicates that most people expect his friends to do this unless (dishonorably) they value their money more than their friend.
Socrates, however, refuses.
Even if people do expect it, to do that would be grossly unjust.
Both Crito's arguments in favor of his plan and Socrates' in rejecting it are rather jumbled as perhaps befits the pressure and excitement of the moment.
Crito cites the damage to his and Socrates' other friends' reputations and delicately minimizes any financial loss he might suffer, in case Socrates might be unwilling to accept any great sacrifice from a friend.
Socrates witheringly dismisses the first consideration and ignores the second.
But Crito also claims that it would actually be unjust of Socrates to stay.
That would allow his enemies to triumph over him and his friends, including his young sons, whom he will abandon by going docilely to his death: a person ought not to take lying down an attack on the things he holds most dear, including philosophy itself and the philosophical life to which he and (presumably) his friends are devoted.
Here we hear strains of the time honored Greek idea that justice is helping one's friends and harming one's enemies, cited by Polemarchus in I.
(But Crito does not propose harming their enemies only preventing them from having their way.)
As to his children, Socrates responds that they will be as well or better cared for after his death than if he resisted it and went into exile.
But ironically, considering his own subsequent arguments for accepting his death, he seems not to hear the larger claim of injustice that Crito lodges.
Crito's jumbled presentation of his case facilitates this.
Unmoved by the claims of justice grounded in his private relationships to friends and family, Socrates appeals to the standards of civic justice imbedded in his relations as a citizen to the Athenian people and to the Athenian system of law.
He claims that a citizen is necessarily, given the benefits he has enjoyed under the laws of the city, their slave, justly required to do whatever they ask, and more forbidden to attack them than to violate his own parents.
That would be retaliation rendering a wrong for the wrong received in his unjust condemnation and retaliation is never just.
But what if he chose to depart not in an Crito unjust spirit of retaliation, but only in order to evade the ill consequences of the unjust condemnation for himself and his friends and family?
As if recognizing that loophole, Socrates also develops a celebrated early version of the social contract a 'contract' between the laws or the city and each citizen, not among the citizens themselves with the argument that now, after he is condemned by an Athenian court and has exhausted all legal appeals, he must, in justice to his implicit promise, abide by the laws' final judgment and accept his death sentence.
It is clear where Socrates stands; he is committed, as a public figure known for pleading the preeminent value of the civic virtues, to honoring them in his personal life and death.
But the dialogue itself, through Crito's ignored appeal to justice in the private sphere, invites the reader to reflect on a wider range of issues about justice than Socrates himself addresses.
Did justice really require that Socrates stay to accept his death?.M.C.
Why have you come so early, Crito?
Or is it not still early?
I am surprised that the warder was willing to listen to you.
He is quite friendly to me by now, Socrates.
I have been here often
and I have given him something.
Have you just come, or have you been here for some time?
Then why did you not wake me right away but sit there in silence?
I would not myself want to be in distress and awake so long.
I have been surprised to see you so peacefully asleep.
It was on purpose that I did not wake you, so that you should spend your time most agreeably.
Often in the past throughout my life, I have considered the way you live happy, and especially so now that you bear your present misfortune so easily and lightly.
It would not be fitting at my age to resent the fact that I must die now.
Other men of your age are caught in such misfortunes, but their age does not prevent them resenting their fate.
Why have you come so early?
I bring bad news, Socrates, not for you, apparently, but for me and all your friends the news is bad and hard to bear.
Indeed, I would count it among the hardest.
Or has the ship arrived from Delos, at the arrival of which I must die?
It has not arrived yet, but it will, I believe, arrive today, according to a message some men brought from Sunium, where they left it.
This makes it obvious that it will come today, and that your life must end tomorrow.
May it be for the best.
If it so please the gods, so be it.
However, I do not think it will arrive today.
What indication have you of this?
I must die the day after the ship arrives.
That is what those in authority say.
Then I do not think it will arrive on this coming day, but on the next.
I take to witness of this a dream I had a little earlier during this night.
It looks as if it was the right time for you not to wake me.
What was your dream?
I thought that a beautiful and comely woman dressed in white approached me.
She called me and said: 'Socrates, may you arrive at fertile Phth on the third day.'
A strange dream, Socrates.
But it seems clear enough to me, Crito.
Too clear it seems, my dear Socrates, but listen to me even now and be saved.
If you die, it will not be a single misfortune for me.
Not only will I be deprived of a friend, the like of whom I shall never find again, but many people who do not know you or me very well will think that I could have saved you if I were willing to spend money, but that I did not care to do so.
Surely there can be no worse reputation than to be thought to value money more highly than one's friends, for the majority will not believe that you yourself were not willing to leave prison while we were eager for you to do so.
My good Crito, why should we care so much for what the majority think?
The most reasonable people, to whom one should pay more attention, will believe that things were done as they were done.
You see, Socrates, that one must also pay attention to the opinion of the majority.
Your present situation makes clear that the majority can inflict not the least but pretty well the greatest evils if one is slandered among them.
Would that the majority could inflict the greatest evils, for they would then be capable of the greatest good, and that would be fine, but now they cannot do either.
They cannot make a man either wise or foolish, but they inflict things haphazardly.
A quotation from Iliad ix.
Achilles has rejected all the presents Agamemnon offered him to get him to return to the battle, and threatens to go home.
He says his ships will sail in the morning, and with good weather he might arrive on the third day 'in fertile Phthia' (which is his home).
The dream means that Socrates' soul, after death, will find its home on the third day (counting, as usual among the Greeks, both the first and the last member of the series).
Crito That may be so.
But tell me this, Socrates, are you anticipating that I and your other friends would have trouble with the informers if you escape from here, as having stolen you away, and that we should be compelled to lose all our property or pay heavy fines and suffer other punishment besides?
If you have any such fear, forget it.
We would be justified in running this risk to save you, and worse, if necessary.
Do follow my advice, and do not act differently.
I do have these things in mind, Crito, and also many others.
It is not much money that some people require to save you and get you out of here.
Further, do you not see that those informers are cheap, and that not much money would be needed to deal with them?
My money is available and is, I think, sufficient.
If, because of your affection for me, you feel you should not spend any of mine, there are those strangers here ready to spend money.
One of them, Simmias the Theban, has brought enough for this very purpose.
Cebes, too, and a good many others.
So, as I say, do not let this fear make you hesitate to save yourself, nor let what you said in court trouble you, that you would not know what to do with yourself if you left Athens, for you would be welcomed in many places to which you might go.
If you want to go to Thessaly, I have friends there who will greatly appreciate you and keep you safe, so that no one in Thessaly will harm you.
Besides, Socrates, I do not think that what you are doing is just, to give up your life when you can save it, and to hasten your fate as your enemies would hasten it, and indeed have hastened it in their wish to destroy you.
Moreover, I think you are betraying your sons by going away and leaving them, when you could bring them up and educate them.
You thus show no concern for what their fate may be.
They will probably have the usual fate of orphans.
Either one should not have children, or one should share with them to the end the toil of upbringing and education.
You seem to me to choose the easiest path, whereas one should choose the path a good and courageous man would choose, particularly when one claims throughout one's life to care for virtue.
I feel ashamed on your behalf and on behalf of us, your friends, lest all that has happened to you be thought due to cowardice on our part: the fact that your trial came to court when it need not have done so, the handling of the trial itself, and now this absurd ending which will be thought to have got beyond our control through some cowardice and unmanliness on our part, since we did not save you, or you save yourself, when it was possible and could be done if we had been of the slightest use.
Consider, Socrates, whether this is not only evil, but shameful, both for you and for us.
Take counsel with yourself, or rather the time for counsel is past and the decision should have been taken, and there is no further opportunity, for this whole business must be ended tonight.
If we delay now, then it will no longer be possible; it will be too late.
Let me persuade you on every count, Socrates, and do not act otherwise.
My dear Crito, your eagerness is worth much if it should have some right aim;
if not, then the greater your keenness the more difficult it is to deal with.
We must therefore examine whether we should act in this way or not, as not only now but at all times I am the kind of man who listens to nothing within me but the argument that on reflection seems best to me.
I cannot, now that this fate has come upon me, discard the arguments I used; they seem to me much the same.
I value and respect the same principles as before, and
if we have no better arguments to bring up at this moment, be sure that I shall not agree with you, not even if the power of the majority were to frighten us with more bogeys, as if we were children, with threats of incarcerations and executions and confiscation of property.
How should we examine this matter most reasonably?
Would it be by taking up first your argument about the opinions of men, whether it is sound in every case that one should pay attention to some opinions, but not to others?
Or was that well spoken before the necessity to die came upon me, but now it is clear that this was said in vain for the sake of argument, that it was in truth play and nonsense?
I am eager to examine together with you, Crito, whether this argument will appear in any way different to me in my present circumstances, or whether it remains the same, whether we are to abandon it or believe it.
It was said on every occasion by those who thought they were speaking sensibly, as I have just now been speaking, that one should greatly value some people's opinions, but not others.
Does that seem to you a sound statement?
You, as far as a human being can tell, are exempt from the likelihood of dying tomorrow, so the present misfortune is not likely to lead you astray.
Consider then, do you not think it a sound statement that one must not value all the opinions of men, but some and not others, nor the opinions of all men, but those of some and not of others?
Is this not well said?
One should value the good opinions, and not the bad ones?
The good opinions are those of wise men, the bad ones those of foolish men?
Come then, what of statements such as this: Should a man professionally engaged in physical training pay attention to the praise and blame and opinion of any man, or to those of one man only, namely a doctor or trainer?
To those of one only.
He should therefore fear the blame and welcome the praise of that one man, and not those of the many?
He must then act and exercise, eat and drink in the way the one, the trainer and the one who knows, thinks right, not all the others?
And if he disobeys the one, disregards his opinion and his praises while valuing those of the many who have no knowledge, will he not suffer harm?
What is that harm, where does it tend, and what part of the man who disobeys does it affect?
Obviously the harm is to his body, which it ruins.
So with other matters, not to enumerate them all, and certainly with actions just and unjust, shameful and beautiful, good and bad, about which we are now deliberating, should we follow the opinion of the many and fear it, or that of the one, if there is one who has knowledge of these things and before whom we feel fear and shame more than before all the others.
If we do not follow his directions, we shall harm and corrupt
that part of ourselves that is improved by just actions and destroyed by unjust actions.
Or is there nothing in this?
I think there certainly is, Socrates.
Come now, if we ruin that which is improved by health and corrupted by disease by not following the opinions of those who know, is life worth living for us when that is ruined?
And that is the body, is it not?
And is life worth living with a body that is corrupted and in bad condition?
And is life worth living for us with that part of us corrupted that unjust action harms and just action benefits?
Or do we think that part of us, whatever it is, that is concerned with justice and injustice, is inferior to the body?
It is more valuable?
We should not then think so much of what the majority will say about us, but what he will say who understands justice and injustice, the one, that is, and the truth itself.
So that, in the first place, you were wrong to believe that we should care for the opinion of the many about what is just, beautiful, good, and their opposites. '
But,' someone might say, 'the many are able to put us to death.'
That too is obvious, Socrates, and someone might well say so.
And, my admirable friend, that argument that we have gone through remains, I think, as before.
Examine the following statement in turn as to whether it stays the same or not, that the most important thing is not life, but the good life.
And that the good life, the beautiful life, and the just life are the same; does that still hold, or not?
As we have agreed so far, we must examine next whether it is just for me to try to get out of here when the Athenians have not acquitted me.
If it is seen to be just, we will try to do so; if it is not, we will abandon the idea.
As for those questions you raise about money, reputation, the upbringing of children, Crito, those considerations in truth belong to those people who easily put men to death and would bring them to life again if they could, without thinking; I mean the majority of men.
For us, however, since our argument leads to this, the only valid consideration, as we were saying just now, is whether we should be acting rightly in giving money and gratitude to those who will lead me out of here, and ourselves helping with the escape, or whether in truth we shall do wrong in doing all this.
If it appears that we shall be acting unjustly, then we have no need at all to take into account whether we shall have to die if we stay here and keep quiet, or suffer in another way, rather than do wrong.
I think you put that beautifully, Socrates, but see what we should do.
Let us examine the question together, my dear friend, and if you can make any objection while I am speaking, make it and I will listen to you, but if you have no objection to make, my dear Crito, then stop now from saying the same thing so often, that I must leave here against the will of the Athenians.
I think it important to persuade you before I act, and not to act against your wishes.
See whether the start of our inquiry is adequately stated, and try to answer what I ask you in the way you think best.
Do we say that one must never in any way do wrong willingly, or must one do wrong in one way and not in another?
Is to do wrong never good or admirable, as we have agreed in the past, or have all these former agreements been washed out during the last few days?
Have we at our age failed to notice for some time that in our serious discussions we were no different from children?
Above all, is the truth such as we used to say it was, whether the majority agree or not, and whether we must still suffer worse things than we do now, or will be treated more gently, that nonetheless, wrongdoing or injustice is in every way harmful and shameful to the wrongdoer?
Do we say so or not?
So one must never do wrong.
Nor must one, when wronged, inflict wrong in return, as the majority believe, since one must never do wrong.
That seems to be the case.
Come now, should one do harm to anyone or not, Crito?
One must never do so.
Well then, if one is done harm, is it right, as the majority say, to do harm in return, or is it not?
Crito Doing harm to people is no different from wrongdoing.
One should never do wrong in return, nor do any man harm, no matter what he may have done to you.
And Crito, see that you do not agree to this, contrary to your belief.
For I know that only a few people hold this view or will hold it, and there is no common ground between those who hold this view and those who do not, but they inevitably despise each other's views.
So then consider very carefully whether we have this view in common, and whether you agree, and let this be the basis of our deliberation, that neither to do wrong nor to return a wrong is ever correct, nor is doing harm in return for harm done.
Or do you disagree and do not share this view as a basis for discussion?
I have held it for a long time and still hold it now, but if you think otherwise, tell me now.
If, however, you stick to our former opinion, then listen to the next point.
I stick to it and agree with you.
Then I state the next point, or rather I ask you: when one has come to an agreement that is just with someone, should one fulfill it or cheat on it?
One should fulfill it.
See what follows from this: if we leave here without the city's permission, are we harming people whom we should least do harm to?
And are we sticking to a just agreement, or not?
I cannot answer your question, Socrates.
If, as we were planning to run away from here, or whatever one should call it, the laws and the state came and confronted us and asked: 'Tell me, Socrates, what are you intending to do?
Do you not by this action you are attempting intend to destroy us, the laws, and indeed the whole city, as far as you are concerned?
Or do you think it possible for a city not to be destroyed if the verdicts of its courts have no force but are nullified and set at naught by private individuals?'
What shall we answer to this and other such arguments?
For many things could be said, especially by an orator on behalf of this law we are destroying, which orders that the judgments of the courts shall be carried out.
Shall we say in answer, 'The city wronged me, and its decision was not right.'
Shall we say that, or what?
Yes, by Zeus, Socrates, that is our answer.
Then what if the laws said: 'Was that the agreement between us, Socrates, or was it to respect the judgments that the city came to?'
And if we wondered at their words, they would perhaps add: 'Socrates, do not wonder at what we say but answer, since you are accustomed to proceed by question and answer.
Come now, what accusation do you bring against us and the city, that you should try to destroy us?
Did we not, first, bring you to birth, and was it not through us that your father married your mother and begat you?
Tell you, do you find anything to criticize in those of us who are concerned with marriage?'
And I would say that I do not criticize them. '
Or in those of us concerned with the Crito nurture of babies and the education that you too received?
Were those assigned to that subject not right to instruct your father to educate you in the arts and in physical culture?'
And I would say that they were right. '
Very well,' they would continue, 'and after you were born and nurtured and educated, could you, in the first place, deny that you are our offspring and servant, both you and your forefathers?
If that is so, do you think that we are on an equal footing as regards the right, and that whatever we do to you it is right for you to do to us?
You were not on an equal footing with your father as regards the right, nor with your master if you had one, so as to retaliate for anything they did to you, to revile them if they reviled you, to beat them if they beat you, and so with many other things.
Do you think you have this right to retaliation against your country and its laws?
That if we undertake to destroy you and think it right to do so, you can undertake to destroy us, as far as you can, in return?
And will you say that you are right to do so, you who truly care for virtue?
Is your wisdom such as not to realize that your country is to be honored more than your mother, your father, and all your ancestors, that it is more to be revered and more sacred, and that it counts for more among the gods and sensible men, that you must worship it, yield to it and placate its anger more than your father's?
You must either persuade it or obey its orders, and endure in silence whatever it instructs you to endure, whether blows or bonds, and if it leads you into war to be wounded or killed, you must obey.
To do so is right, and one must not give way or retreat or leave one's post, but both in war and in courts and everywhere else, one must obey the commands of one's city and country, or persuade it as to the nature of justice.
It is impious to bring violence to bear against your mother or father; it is much more so to use it against your country.'
What shall we say in reply, Crito, that the laws speak the truth, or not?
Reflect now, Socrates,' the laws might say, 'that if what we say is true, you are not treating us rightly by planning to do what you are planning.
We have given you birth, nurtured you, educated you; we have given you and all other citizens a share of all the good things we could.
Even so, by giving every Athenian the opportunity, once arrived at voting age and having observed the affairs of the city and us the laws, we proclaim that if we do not please him, he can take his possessions and go wherever he pleases.
Not one of our laws raises any obstacle or forbids him, if he is not satisfied with us or the city, if one of you wants to go and live in a colony or wants to go anywhere else, and keep his property.
We say, however, that whoever of you remains, when he sees how we conduct our trials and manage the city in other ways, has in fact come to an agreement with us to obey our instructions.
We say that the one who disobeys does wrong in three ways, first because in us he disobeys his parents, also those who brought him up, and because, in spite of his agreement, he neither obeys us nor, if we do something wrong, does he try to persuade us to do better.
Yet we only propose things, we do not Crito issue savage commands to do whatever we order; we give two alternatives, either to persuade us or to do what we say.
We do say that you too, Socrates, are open to those charges if you do what you have in mind; you would be among, not the least, but the most guilty of the Athenians.'
And if I should say 'Why so?'
they might well be right to upbraid me and say that I am among the Athenians who most definitely came to that agreement with them.
They might well say: 'Socrates, we have convincing proofs that we and the city were congenial to you.
You would not have dwelt here most consistently of all the Athenians if the city had not been exceedingly pleasing to you.
You have never left the city, even to see a festival, nor for any other reason except military service; you have never gone to stay in any other city, as people do; you have had no desire to know another city or other laws; we and our city satisfied you. '
So decisively did you choose us and agree to be a citizen under us.
Also, you have had children in this city, thus showing that it was congenial to you.
Then at your trial you could have assessed your penalty at exile if you wished, and you are now attempting to do against the city's wishes what you could then have done with her consent.
Then you prided yourself that you did not resent death, but you chose, as you said, death in preference to exile.
Now, however, those words do not make you ashamed, and you pay no heed to us, the laws, as you plan to destroy us, and you act like the meanest type of slave by trying to run away, contrary to your commitments and your agreement to live as a citizen under us.
First then, answer us on this very point, whether we speak the truth when we say that you agreed, not only in words but by your deeds, to live in accordance with us.'
What are we to say to that, Crito?
We must, Socrates. '
Surely,' they might say, 'you are breaking the commitments and agreements that you made with us without compulsion or deceit, and under no pressure of time for deliberation.
You have had seventy years during which you could have gone away if you did not like us, and if you thought our agreements unjust.
You did not choose to go to Sparta or to Crete, which you are always saying are well governed, nor to any other city, Greek or foreign.
You have been away from Athens less than the lame or the blind or other handicapped people.
It is clear that the city has been outstandingly more congenial to you than to other Athenians, and so have we, the laws, for what city can please without laws?
Will you then not now stick to our agreements?
You will, Socrates, if we can persuade you, and not make yourself a laughingstock by leaving the city. '
For consider what good you will do yourself or your friends by breaking our agreements and committing such a wrong.
It is pretty obvious
that your friends will themselves be in danger of exile, disfranchisement, and loss of property.
As for yourself, if you go to one of the nearby cities Thebes or Megara, both are well governed you will arrive as an enemy to their government; all who care for their city will look on you with suspicion, as a destroyer of the laws.
You will also strengthen the conviction Crito of the jury that they passed the right sentence on you, for anyone who destroys the laws could easily be thought to corrupt the young and the ignorant.
Or will you avoid cities that are well governed and men who are civilized?
If you do this, will your life be worth living?
Will you have social intercourse with them and not be ashamed to talk to them?
And what will you say?
The same as you did here, that virtue and justice are man's most precious possession, along with lawful behavior and the laws?
Do you not think that Socrates would appear to be an unseemly kind of person?
Or will you leave those places and go to Crito's friends in Thessaly?
There you will find the greatest license and disorder, and they may enjoy hearing from you how absurdly you escaped from prison in some disguise, in a leather jerkin or some other things in which escapees wrap themselves, thus altering your appearance.
Will there be no one to say that you, likely to live but a short time more, were so greedy for life that you transgressed the most important laws?
Possibly, Socrates, if you do not annoy anyone, but if you do, many disgraceful things will be said about you. '
You will spend your time ingratiating yourself with all men, and be at their beck and call.
What will you do in Thessaly but feast, as if you had gone to a banquet in Thessaly?
As for those conversations of yours about justice and the rest of virtue, where will they be?
You say you want to live for the sake of your children, that you may bring them up and educate them.
Will you bring them up and educate them by taking them to Thessaly and making strangers of them, that they may enjoy that too?
but they will be better brought up and educated here, while you are alive, though absent?
Yes, your friends will look after them.
Will they look after them if you go and live in Thessaly, but not if you go away to the underworld?
If those who profess themselves your friends are any good at all, one must assume that they will. '
Be persuaded by us who have brought you up, Socrates.
Do not value either your children or your life or anything else more than goodness, in order that when you arrive in Hades you may have all this as your defense before the rulers there.
If you do this deed, you will not think it better or more just or more pious here, nor will any one of your friends, nor will it be better for you when you arrive yonder.
As it is, you depart, if you depart, after being wronged not by us, the laws, but by men; but if you depart after shamefully returning wrong for wrong and mistreatment for mistreatment, after breaking your agreements and commitments with us, after mistreating those you should mistreat least yourself, your friends, your country and us we shall be angry with you while you are still alive, and our brothers, the laws of the underworld, will not receive you kindly, knowing that you tried to destroy us as far as you could.
Do not let Crito persuade you, rather than us, to do what he says.
' Crito, my dear friend, be assured that these are the words I seem to hear, as the Corybants seem to hear the music of their flutes, and the echo of these words resounds in me, and makes it impossible for me to hear Crito anything else.
As far as my present beliefs go, if you speak in opposition to them, you will speak in vain.
However, if you think you can accomplish anything, speak.
I have nothing to say, Socrates.
Let it be then, Crito, and let us act in this way, since this is the way the god is leading us.
Phaedo, known to the ancients also by the descriptive title On the Soul, is a drama about Socrates' last hours and his death in the jail at Athens.
On the way back home to Elis, one of his intimates, Phaedo, who was with him then, stops off at Phlius, in the Peloponnese.
There he reports it all to a group of Pythagoreans settled there since their expulsion from Southern Italy.
The Pythagorean connection is carried further in the dialogue itself, since Socrates' two fellow discussants, Simmias and Cebes from Thebes, the other city where expelled members of the brotherhood settled are associates of Philolaus, the leading Pythagorean there.
Pythagoreans were noted for their belief in the immortality of the soul and its reincarnation in human or animal form and for the consequent concern to keep one's soul pure by avoiding contamination with the body, so as to win the best possible next life.
Socrates weaves all these themes into his own discussion of the immortality of the soul.
It is noteworthy that these Pythagorean elements are lacking from the where Socrates expresses himself noncommittally and unconcernedly about the possibility of immortality and from Crito, as well as the varied discussions of the soul's virtues in such dialogues as Euthyphro, Laches, and Protagoras.
He takes care to tell us that he was not present on the last day: Phaedo says he was ill.
Socrates makes much of the human intellect's affinity to eternal Forms of Beauty, Justice, and other normative notions, and of mathematical properties and objects, such as Oddness and Evenness and the integers Two, Three, and the rest, as well as physical forces such as Hot and Cold, all existing in a nonphysical realm accessible only to abstract thought.
Indeed, the Phaedo's affinities in philosophical theory go not toward the Socratic dialogues, but to and.
There is an unmistakable reference to Meno's theory of theoretical knowledge (of geometry, and also of the nature of human virtue) as coming by recollection of objects known before birth.
But now the claim is made that this recollection is of Forms.
Phaedo Phaedo concludes with a myth, describing the fate of the soul after death.
Concluding myths in other dialogues, with which this one should be compared, are those in Gorgias and.
It should also be compared with the myth in Socrates' second speech in the Phaedrus.
M.C. Were you with Socrates yourself, Phaedo, on the day when he drank the poison in prison, or did someone else tell you about it?
I was there myself, Echecrates.
What are the things he said before he died?
I should be glad to hear this.
Hardly anyone from Phlius visits Athens nowadays, nor has any stranger come from Athens for some time who could give us a clear account of what happened, except that he drank the poison and died, but nothing more.
Did you not even hear how the trial went?
Yes, someone did tell us about that, and we wondered that he seems to have died a long time after the trial took place.
Why was that, Phaedo?
That was by chance, Echecrates.
The day before the trial, as it happened, the prow of the ship that the Athenians send to Delos had been crowned with garlands.
It is the ship in which, the Athenians say, Theseus once sailed to Crete, taking with him the two lots of seven victims.
He saved them and was himself saved.
The Athenians vowed then to Apollo, so the story goes, that if they were saved they would send a mission to Delos every year.
And from that time to this they send such an annual mission to the god.
They have a law to keep the city pure while it lasts, and no execution may take place once the mission has begun until the ship has made its journey to Delos and returned to Athens, and this can sometimes take a long time if the winds delay it.
The mission begins when the priest of Apollo crowns the prow of the ship, and this happened, as I say, the day before Socrates' trial.
That is why Socrates was in prison a long time between his trial and his execution.
Legend says that Minos, king of Crete, compelled the Athenians to send seven youths and seven maidens every year to be sacrificed to the Minotaur until Theseus saved them and killed the monster.
What about his actual death, Phaedo?
Who of his friends were with him?
Or did the authorities not allow them to be present and he died with no friends present?
Some were present, in fact, a good many.
Please be good enough to tell us all that occurred as fully as possible, unless you have some pressing business.
and I will try to tell you the whole story, for nothing
gives me more pleasure than to call Socrates to mind, whether talking about him myself, or listening to someone else do so.
Your hearers will surely be like you in this, Phaedo.
So do try to tell us every detail as exactly as you can.
I certainly found being there an astonishing experience.
Although I was witnessing the death of one who was my friend, I had no feeling of pity, for the man appeared happy in both manner and words as he died nobly and without fear, Echecrates, so that it struck me that even in going down to the underworld he was going with the gods' blessing and that he would fare well when he got there, if anyone ever does.
That is why I had no feeling of pity, such as would seem natural in my sorrow, nor indeed of pleasure, as we engaged in philosophical discussion as we were accustomed to do for our arguments were of that sort
but I had a strange feeling, an unaccustomed mixture of pleasure and pain at the same time as I reflected that he was just about to die.
All of us present were affected in much the same way, sometimes laughing, then weeping; especially one of us, Apollodorus you know the man and his ways.
He was quite overcome; but I was myself disturbed, and so were the others.
Who, Phaedo, were those present?
Among the local people there was Apollodorus, whom I mentioned, Critobulus and his father, also Hermogenes, Epigenes, Aeschines and Antisthenes.
Ctesippus of Paeania was there, Menexenus and some others.
Plato, I believe, was ill.
Were there some foreigners present?
Yes, Simmias from Thebes with Cebes and Phaedondes, and from Megara, Euclides and Terpsion.
What about Aristippus and Cleombrotus?
They were said to be in Aegina.
The father of Critobulus is Crito, after whom the dialogue Crito is named.
Several of the other friends of Socrates mentioned here also appear in other dialogues.
Hermogenes is one of the speakers in Cratylus.
Epigenes is mentioned in, as is Aeschines, who was a writer of Socratic dialogues.
Menexenus has a part in Lysis and has a dialogue named after him; Ctesippus appears in both Lysis and Euthydemus.
Euclides and Terpsion are speakers in the introductory conversation of Theaetetus, and Euclides too wrote Socratic dialogues.
Simmias and Cebes are mentioned in Crito, as having come to Athens with enough money to secure Socrates' escape.
Phaedo Was there anyone else?
I think these were about all.
Well then, what do you say the conversation was about?
I will try to tell you everything from the beginning.
On the previous days also both the others and I used to visit Socrates.
We foregathered at daybreak at the court where the trial took place, for it was close to the prison, and each day we used to wait around talking until the prison should open, for it did not open early.
When it opened we used to go in to Socrates and spend most of the day with him.
On this day we gathered rather early, because when we left the prison on the previous evening we were informed that the ship from Delos had arrived, and so we told each other to come to the usual place as early as possible.
When we arrived the gatekeeper who used to answer our knock came out and told us to wait and not go in until he told us to. '
The Eleven,' he said, 'are freeing Socrates from his bonds and telling him how his death will take place today.'
After a short time he came and told us to go in.
We found Socrates recently released from his chains, and Xanthippe you know her sitting by him, holding their baby.
When she saw us, she cried out and said the sort of thing that women usually say: 'Socrates, this is the last time your friends will talk to you and you to them.'
Socrates looked at Crito. '
Crito,' he said, 'let someone take her home.'
And some of Crito's people led her away lamenting and beating her breast.
Socrates sat up on the bed, bent his leg and rubbed it with his hand, and as he rubbed he said: '
What a strange thing that which men call pleasure seems to be, and how astonishing the relation it has with what is thought to be its opposite, namely pain!
A man cannot have both at the same time.
Yet if he pursues and catches the one, he is almost always bound to catch the other also, like two creatures with one head.
I think that if Aesop had noted this he would have composed a fable that a god wished to reconcile their opposition but could not do so, so he joined their two heads together, and therefore when a man has the one, the other follows later.
This seems to be happening to me.
My bonds caused pain in my leg, and now pleasure seems to be following.'
Cebes intervened and said: 'By Zeus, yes, Socrates, you did well to remind me.
Even asked me the day before yesterday, as others had done before, what induced you to write poetry after you came to prison, you who had never composed any poetry before, putting the fables of Aesop into verse and composing the hymn to Apollo.
If it is of any concern to you that I should have an answer to give to Evenus when he repeats his question, as I know he will, tell me what to say to him.'
Tell him the truth, Cebes, he said, that I did not do this with the idea of rivaling him or his poems, for I knew that would not be easy, but
I. The Eleven were the police commissioners of Athens.
Socrates refers to Evenus as a and teacher of the young in a,.
Phaedo tried to find out the meaning of certain dreams and to satisfy my conscience in case it was this kind of art they were frequently bidding me to practice.
The dreams were something like this: the same dream often came to me in the past, now in one shape now in another, but saying the same thing: 'Socrates,' it said, 'practice and cultivate the arts.'
In the past I imagined that it was instructing and advising me to do what I was doing, such as those who encourage runners in a race, that the dream was thus bidding me
do the very thing I was doing, namely, to practice the art of philosophy, this being the highest kind of art, and I was doing that.
But now, after my trial took place, and the festival of the god was preventing my execution, I thought that, in case my dream was bidding me to practice this popular art, I should not disobey it but compose poetry.
I thought it safer not to leave here until I had satisfied my conscience by writing poems in obedience to the dream.
So I first wrote in honor of the god of the present festival.
After that I realized that a poet, if he is to be a poet, must compose fables, not arguments.
Being no teller of fables myself, I took the stories I knew and had at hand, the fables of Aesop, and I versified the first ones I came across.
Tell this to Evenus, Cebes, wish him well and bid him farewell, and tell him, if he is wise, to follow me as soon as possible.
I am leaving today, it seems, as the Athenians so order it.
Said Simmias: 'What kind of advice is this you are giving to Evenus, Socrates?
I have met him many times, and from my observation he is not at all likely to follow it willingly.'
How so, said he, is Evenus not a philosopher?
I think so, Simmias said.
Then Evenus will be willing, like every man who partakes worthily of philosophy.
Yet perhaps he will not take his own life, for that, they say, is not right.
As he said this, Socrates put his feet on the ground and remained in this position during the rest of the conversation.
Then Cebes asked: 'How do you mean Socrates, that it is not right to do oneself violence, and yet that the philosopher will be willing to follow one who is dying?'
Come now, Cebes, have you and Simmias, who keep company with Philolaus, not heard about such things?
Nothing definite, Socrates.
Indeed, I too speak about this from hearsay, but I do not mind telling you what I have heard, for it is perhaps most appropriate for one who is about to depart yonder to tell and examine tales about what we believe that journey to be like.
What else could one do in the time we have until sunset?
But whatever is the reason, Socrates, for people to say that it is not right to kill oneself?
As to your question just now, I have heard Philolaus say this when staying in Thebes
and I have also heard it from others, but I have never heard anyone give a clear account of the matter.
See Introductory Note.
Well, he said, we must do our best, and you may yet hear one.
And it may well astonish you if this subject, alone of all things, is simple, and it is never, as with everything else, better at certain times and for certain people to die than to live.
And if this is so, you may well find it astonishing that those for whom it is better to die are wrong to help themselves, and that they must wait for someone else to benefit them.
And Cebes, lapsing into his own dialect, laughed quietly and said: 'Zeus knows it is.'
Indeed, said Socrates, it does seem unreasonable when put like that, but perhaps there is reason to it.
There is the explanation that is put in the language of the mysteries, that we men are in a kind of prison, and that one must not free oneself or run away.
That seems to me an impressive doctrine and one not easy to understand fully.
However, Cebes, this seems to me well expressed, that the gods are our guardians and that men are one of their possessions.
And would you not be angry if one of your possessions killed itself when you had not given any sign that you wished it to die, and if you had any punishment you could inflict, you would inflict it?
Perhaps then, put in this way, it is not unreasonable that one should not kill oneself before a god had indicated some necessity to do so, like the necessity now put upon us.
That seems likely, said Cebes.
As for what you were saying, that philosophers should be willing and ready to die, that seems strange, Socrates, if what we said just now is reasonable, namely, that a god is our protector and that we are his possessions.
It is not logical that the wisest of men should not resent leaving this service in which they are governed by the best of masters, the gods, for a wise man cannot believe that he will look after himself better when he is free.
A foolish man might easily think so, that he must escape from his master; he would not reflect that one must not escape from a good master but stay with him as long as possible, because it would be foolish to escape.
But the sensible man would want always to remain with one better than himself.
So, Socrates, the opposite of what was said before is likely to be true; the wise would resent dying, whereas the foolish would rejoice at it.
I thought that when Socrates heard this he was pleased by Cebes' argumentation.
Glancing at us, he said: 'Cebes is always on the track of some arguments; he is certainly not willing to be at once convinced by what one says.'
But actually, Socrates, I think myself that Cebes has a point now.
Why should truly wise men want to avoid the service of masters better than themselves, and leave them easily?
And I think Cebes is aiming his argument at you, because you are bearing leaving us so lightly, and leaving those good masters, as you say yourself, the gods.'
You are both justified in what you say, and I think you mean that I must make a defense against this, as if I were in court.
You certainly must, said Simmias.
Come then, he said, let me try to make my defense to you more convincing than it was to the jury.
For, Simmias and Cebes, I should be wrong not to resent dying if I did not believe that I should go first to other wise and good gods, and then to men who have died and are better than men are here.
Be assured that, as it is, I expect to join the company of good men.
This last I would not altogether insist on, but
if I insist on anything at all in these matters, it is that I shall come to gods who are very good masters.
That is why I am not so resentful, because I have good hope that some future awaits men after death, as we have been told for years, a much better future for the good than for the wicked.
Well now, Socrates, said Simmias, do you intend to keep this belief to yourself as you leave us, or would you share it with us?
I certainly think it would be a blessing for us too, and at the same time it would be your defense if you convince us of what you say.
I will try, he said, but first let us see what it is
that Crito here has, I think, been wanting to say for quite a while.
What else, Socrates, said Crito, but what the man who is to give you the poison has been telling me for some time, that I should warn you to talk as little as possible.
People get heated when they talk, he says, and one should not be heated when taking the poison, as those who do must sometimes drink it two or three times.
Socrates replied: 'Take no notice of him; only let him be prepared to administer it twice
or, if necessary, three times.'
I was rather sure you would say that, Crito said, but he has been bothering me for some time.
Let him be, he said.
I want to make my argument before you, my judges, as to why I think that a man who has truly spent his life in philosophy is probably right to be of good cheer in the face of death and to be very hopeful that after death he will attain the greatest blessings yonder.
I will try to tell you, Simmias and Cebes, how this may be so.
I am afraid that other people do not realize that the one aim of those who practice philosophy in the proper manner is to practice for dying and death.
Now if this is true, it would be strange indeed if they were eager for this all their lives and then resent it when what they have wanted and practiced for a long time comes upon them.
Simmias laughed and said: 'By Zeus, Socrates, you made me laugh, though I was in no laughing mood just now.
I think that the majority, on hearing this, will think that it describes the philosophers very well, and our people in Thebes would thoroughly agree that philosophers are nearly dead and that the majority of men is well aware that they deserve to be.
And they would be telling the truth, Simmias, except for their being aware.
They are not aware of the way true philosophers are nearly dead, Phaedo nor of the way they deserve to be, nor of the sort of death they deserve.
, he said, let us talk among ourselves.
Do we believe that there is such a thing as death?
Certainly, said Simmias.
Is it anything else than the separation of the soul from the body?
Do we believe that death is this, namely, that the body comes to be separated by itself apart from the soul, and the soul comes to be separated by itself apart from the body?
Is death anything else than that?
No, that is what it is, he said.
Consider then, my good sir, whether you share my opinion, for this will lead us to a better knowledge of what we are investigating.
Do you think it is the part of a philosopher to be concerned with such so called pleasures as those of food and drink?
What about the pleasures of sex?
What of the other pleasures concerned with the service of the body?
Do you think such a man prizes them greatly, the acquisition of distinguished clothes and shoes and the other bodily ornaments?
Do you think he values these or despises them, except in so far as one cannot do without them?
I think the true philosopher despises them.
Do you not think, he said, that in general such a man's concern is not with the body but that, as far as he can, he turns away from the body towards the soul?
So in the first place, such things show clearly that the philosopher more than other men frees the soul from association with the body as much as possible?
A man who finds no pleasure in such things and has no part in them is thought by the majority not to deserve to live and to be close to death; the man, that is, who does not care for the pleasures of the body.
What you say is certainly true.
Then what about the actual acquiring of knowledge?
Is the body an obstacle when one associates with it in the search for knowledge?
I mean, for example, do men find any truth in sight or hearing, or are not even the poets forever telling us that we do not see or hear anything accurately, and surely if those two physical senses are not clear or precise, our other senses can hardly be accurate, as they are all inferior to these.
When then, he asked, does the soul grasp the truth?
For whenever it attempts to examine anything with the body, it is clearly deceived by it.
Is it not in reasoning if anywhere that any reality becomes clear to the soul?
And indeed the soul reasons best when none of these senses troubles it, neither hearing nor sight, nor pain nor pleasure, but when it is most by itself, taking leave of the body and as far as possible having no contact or association with it in its search for reality.
And it is then that the soul of the philosopher most disdains the body, flees from it and seeks to be by itself?
What about the following, Simmias?
Do we say that there is such a thing as the Just itself, or not?
We do say so, by Zeus.
And the Beautiful, and the Good?
And have you ever seen any of these things with your eyes?
Or have you ever grasped them with any of your bodily senses?
I am speaking of all things such as Bigness, Health, Strength and, in a word, the reality of all other things, that which each of them essentially is.
Is what is most true in them contemplated through the body, or is this the position:
whoever of us prepares himself best and most accurately to grasp that thing itself which he is investigating will come closest to the knowledge of it?
Then he will do this most perfectly who approaches the object with thought alone, without associating any sight with his thought, or dragging in any sense perception with his reasoning, but who, using pure thought alone, tries to track down each reality pure and by itself, freeing himself as far as possible from eyes and ears and, in a word, from the whole body, because the body confuses the soul and does not allow it to acquire truth and wisdom whenever it is associated with it.
Will not that man reach reality, Simmias, if anyone does?
What you say, said Simmias, is indeed true.
All these things will necessarily make the true philosophers believe and say to each other something like this: 'There is likely to be something such as a path to guide us out of our confusion, because as long as we have a body and our soul is fused with such an evil we shall never adequately attain what we desire, which we affirm to be the truth.
The body keeps us busy in a thousand ways because of its need for nurture.
Moreover, if certain diseases befall it, they impede our search for the truth.
It fills us with wants, desires, fears, all sorts of illusions and much nonsense, so that, as it is said, in truth and in fact no thought of any kind ever comes to us from the body.
Only the body and its desires cause war, civil discord and battles, for all wars are due to the desire to acquire wealth, and it is the body and the care of it, to which we are enslaved, which compel us to acquire wealth, and all this makes us too busy to practice philosophy.
Phaedo Worst of all, if we do get some respite from it and turn to some investigation, everywhere in our investigations the body is present and makes for confusion and fear, so that it prevents us from seeing the truth. '
It really has been shown to us that, if we are ever to have pure knowledge, we must escape from the body and observe things in themselves with the soul by itself.
It seems likely that we shall, only then, when we are dead, attain that which we desire and of which we claim to be lovers, namely, wisdom, as our argument shows, not while we live; for if it is impossible to attain any pure knowledge with the body, then one of two things is true:
either we can never attain knowledge or we can do so after death.
Then and not before, the soul is by itself apart from the body.
While we live, we shall be closest to knowledge if we refrain as much as possible from association with the body and do not join with it more than we must, if we are not infected with its nature but purify ourselves from it until the god himself frees us.
In this way we shall escape the contamination of the body's folly; we shall be likely to be in the company of people of the same kind, and by our own efforts we shall know all that is pure, which is presumably the truth, for it is not permitted to the impure to attain the pure.'
Such are the things, Simmias, that all those who love learning in the proper manner must say to one another and believe.
I certainly do, Socrates.
And if this is true, my friend, said Socrates, there is good hope that on arriving where I am going, if anywhere, I shall acquire what has been our chief preoccupation in our past life, so that the journey that is now ordered for me is full of good hope, as it is also for any other man who believes that his mind has been prepared and, as it were, purified.
It certainly is, said Simmias.
And does purification not turn out to be what we mentioned in our argument some time ago, namely, to separate the soul as far as possible from the body and accustom it to gather itself and collect itself out of every part of the body and to dwell by itself as far as it can both now and in the future, freed, as it were, from the bonds of the body?
And that freedom and separation of the soul from the body is called death?
That is altogether so.
It is only those who practice philosophy in the right way, we say, who always most want to free the soul; and this release and separation of the soul from the body is the preoccupation of the philosophers?
Therefore, as I said at the beginning, it would be ridiculous for a man to train himself in life to live in a state as close to death as possible, and then to resent it when it comes?
Ridiculous, of course.
In fact, Simmias, he said, those who practice philosophy in the right way are in training for dying and they fear death least of all men.
Consider it from this point of view: if they are altogether estranged from the body and desire to have their soul by itself, would it not be quite absurd for them to be afraid and resentful when this happens?
If they did not gladly set out for a place, where, on arrival, they may hope to attain that for which they had yearned during their lifetime, that is, wisdom, and where they would be rid of the presence of that from which they are estranged?
Many men, at the death of their lovers, wives or sons, were willing to go to the underworld, driven by the hope of seeing there those for whose company they longed, and being with them.
Will then a true lover of wisdom, who has a similar hope and knows that he will never find it to any extent except in Hades, be resentful of dying and not gladly undertake the journey thither?
One must surely think so, my friend, if he is a true philosopher, for he is firmly convinced that he will not find pure knowledge anywhere except there.
And if this is so, then, as I said just now, would it not be highly unreasonable for such a man to fear death?
It certainly would, by Zeus, he said.
Then you have sufficient indication, he said, that any man whom you see resenting death was not a lover of wisdom but a lover of the body, and also a lover of wealth or of honors, either or both.
It is certainly as you say.
And, Simmias, he said, does not what is called
courage belong especially to men of this disposition?
And the quality of moderation which even the majority call by that name, that is, not to get swept off one's feet by one's passions, but to treat them with disdain and orderliness, is this not suited only to those who most of all despise the body and live the life of philosophy?
Necessarily so, he said.
If you are willing to reflect on the courage and moderation of other people, you will find them strange.
In what way, Socrates?
You know that they all consider death a great evil?
Definitely, he said.
And the brave among them face death, when they do, for fear of greater evils?
Therefore, it is fear and terror that make all men brave, except the philosophers.
Yet it is illogical to be brave through fear and cowardice.
What of the moderate among them?
Is their experience not similar?
Is it licentiousness of a kind that makes them moderate?
We say this is impossible, yet their experience of this simple minded moderation turns out to be similar: they fear to be deprived of other pleasures which they Phaedo desire, so they keep away from some pleasures because they are overcome by others.
Now to be mastered by pleasure is what they call licentiousness, but what happens to them is that they master certain pleasures because they are mastered by others.
This is like what we mentioned just now, that in some way it is a kind of licentiousness that has made them moderate.
My good Simmias, I fear this is not the right exchange to attain virtue, to exchange pleasures for pleasures, pains for pains and fears for fears, the greater for the less like coins, but that the only valid currency for which all these things should be exchanged is wisdom.
With this we have real courage and moderation and justice and, in a word, true virtue, with wisdom, whether pleasures and fears and all such things be present or absent.
When these are exchanged for one another in separation from wisdom, such virtue is only an illusory appearance of virtue; it is in fact fit for slaves, without soundness or truth, whereas, in truth, moderation and courage and justice are a purging away of all such things, and wisdom itself is a kind of cleansing or purification.
It is likely that those who established the mystic rites for us were not inferior persons but were speaking in riddles long ago when they said that whoever arrives in the underworld uninitiated and unsanctified will wallow in the mire, whereas he who arrives there purified and initiated will dwell with the gods.
There are indeed, as those concerned with the mysteries say, many who carry the thyrsus but the Bacchants are few.
These latter are, in my opinion, no other than those who have practiced philosophy in the right way.
I have in my life left nothing undone in order to be counted among these as far as possible, as I have been eager to be in every way.
Whether my eagerness was right and we accomplished anything we shall,
I think, know for certain in a short time, god willing, on arriving yonder.
This is my defense, Simmias and Cebes, that I am likely to be right to leave you and my masters here without resentment or complaint, believing that there, as here, I shall find good masters and good friends.
If my defense is more convincing to you than to the Athenian jury, it will be well.
When Socrates finished, Cebes intervened: Socrates, he said, everything else you said is excellent, I think, but men find it very hard to believe what you said about the soul.
They think that after it has left the body it no longer exists anywhere, but that it is destroyed and dissolved on the day the man dies, as soon as it leaves the body; and that, on leaving it, it is dispersed like breath or smoke, has flown away and gone and is no longer anything anywhere.
If indeed it gathered itself together and existed by itself and escaped those evils you were recently enumerating, there would then be much good hope, Socrates, that what you say is true; but to believe this requires a good deal of faith and persuasive argument, to.
That is, the true worshippers of Dionysus, as opposed to those who only carry the external symbols of his worship.
Phaedo believe that the soul still exists after a man has died and that it still possesses some capability and intelligence.
What you say is true, Cebes, Socrates said, but what shall we do?
Do you want to discuss whether this is likely to be true or not?
Personally, said Cebes, I should like to hear your opinion on the subject.
I do not think, said Socrates, that anyone who heard me now, not even a comic poet, could say that I am babbling and discussing things that do not concern me, so we must examine the question thoroughly, if you think we should do so.
Let us examine it in some such a manner as this: whether the souls of men who have died exist in the underworld or not.
We recall an ancient theory that souls arriving there come from here, and then again that they arrive here and are born here from the dead.
If that is true, that the living come back from the dead, then surely our souls must exist there, for they could not come back if they did not exist, and this is a sufficient proof that these things are so if it truly appears that the living never come from any other source than from the dead.
If this is not the case we should need another argument.
Quite so, said Cebes.
Do not, he said, confine yourself to humanity if you want to understand this more readily, but take all animals and all plants into account, and, in short, for all things which come to be, let us see whether they come to be in this way, that is, from their opposites if they have such, as the beautiful is the opposite of the ugly and the just of the unjust, and a thousand other things of the kind.
Let us examine whether those that have an opposite must necessarily come to be from their opposite and from nowhere else, as for example when something comes to be larger
it must necessarily become larger from having been smaller before.
Then if something smaller comes to be, it will come from something larger before, which became smaller?
And the weaker comes to be from the stronger, and the swifter from the slower?
Further, if something worse comes to be, does it not come from the better, and the juster from the more unjust?
So we have sufficiently established that all things come to be in this way, opposites from opposites?
There is a further point, something such as this, about these opposites: between each of those pairs of opposites there are two processes: from the one to the other and then again from the other to the first; between the larger and the smaller there is increase and decrease, and we call the one increasing and the other decreasing?
And so too there is separation and combination, cooling and heating, and all such things, even if sometimes we do not have a name for the process, but in fact it must be everywhere that they come to be from one another, and that there is a process of becoming from each into the other?
Well then, is there an opposite to living, as sleeping is the opposite of being awake?
Being dead, he said.
Therefore, if these are opposites, they come to be from one another, and there are two processes of generation between the two?
I will tell you, said Socrates, one of the two pairs
I was just talking about, the pair itself and the two processes, and you will tell me the other.
I mean, to sleep and to be awake; to be awake comes from sleeping, and to sleep comes from being awake.
Of the two processes one is going to sleep, the other is waking up.
Do you accept that, or not?
You tell me in the same way about life and death.
Do you not say that to be dead is the opposite of being alive?
And they come to be from one another?
What comes to be from being alive?
And what comes to be from being dead?
One must agree that it is being alive.
Then, Cebes, living creatures and things come to be from the dead?
Then our souls exist in the underworld.
Then in this case one of the two processes of becoming is clear, for dying is clear enough, is it not?
What shall we do then?
Shall we not supply the opposite process of becoming?
Is nature to be lame in this case?
Or must we provide a process of becoming opposite to dying?
Coming to life again.
Therefore, he said, if there is such a thing as coming to life again, it would be a process of coming from the dead to the living?
It is agreed between us then that the living come from the dead in this way no less than the dead from the living, and, if that is so, it seems to Phaedo be a sufficient proof that the souls of the dead must be somewhere
whence they can come back again.
I think, Socrates, he said, that this follows from what we have agreed on.
Consider in this way, Cebes, he said, that, as I think, we were not wrong to agree.
If the two processes of becoming did not always balance each other as if they were going round in a circle, but generation proceeded from one point to its opposite in a straight line and it did not turn back again to the other opposite or take any turning, do you realize that all things would ultimately be in the same state, be affected in the same way, and cease to become?
It is not hard to understand what I mean.
If, for example, there was such a process as going to sleep, but no corresponding process of waking up, you realize that in the end everything would show the story of Endymi to have no meaning.
There would be no point to it because everything would have the same experience as he and be asleep.
And if everything were combined and nothing separated, the saying of Anaxagor would soon be true, 'that all things were mixed together.'
In the same way, my dear Cebes, if everything that partakes of life were to die and remain in that state and not come to life again, would not everything ultimately have to be dead and nothing alive?
Even if the living came from some other source, and all that lived died, how could all things avoid being absorbed in death?
It could not be, Socrates, said Cebes, and I think what you say is altogether true.
I think, Cebes, said he, that this is very definitely the case and that we were not deceived when we agreed on this: coming to life again in truth exists, the living come to be from the dead, and the souls of the dead exist.
Furthermore, Socrates, Cebes rejoined, such is also the case if that theory is true that you are accustomed to mention frequently, that for us learning is no other than recollection.
According to this, we must at some previous time have learned what we now recollect.
This is possible only if our soul existed somewhere before it took on this human shape.
So according to this theory too, the soul is likely to be something immortal.
Cebes, Simmias interrupted, what are the proofs of this?
Remind me, for I do not quite recall them at the moment.
There is one excellent argument, said Cebes, namely that when men are interrogated in the right manner, they always give the right answer of their own accord, and they could not do this if they did not possess the.
Endymion was granted eternal sleep by Zeus.
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae was born at the beginning of the fifth century.
He came to Athens as a young man and spent most of his life there in the study of natural philosophy.
He is quoted later in the dialogue ff.)
as claiming that the universe is directed by Mind (Nous).
The reference here is to his statement that in the original state of the world all its elements were thoroughly commingled.
Phaedo knowledge and the right explanation inside them.
Then if one shows them a diagram or something else of that kind, this will show most clearly that such is the case.
If this does not convince you, Simmias, said Socrates, see whether you agree if we examine it in some such way as this, for do you doubt that what we call learning is recollection?
It is not that I doubt, said Simmias, but I want to experience the very thing we are discussing, recollection, and from what Cebes undertook to say, I am now remembering and am pretty nearly convinced.
Nevertheless, I should like to hear now the way you were intending to explain it.
We surely agree that if anyone recollects anything, he must have known it before.
Do we not also agree that when knowledge comes to mind in this way, it is recollection?
Like this: when a man sees or hears or in some other way perceives one thing and not only knows that thing but also thinks of another thing of which the knowledge is not the same but different, are we not right to say that he recollects the second thing that comes into his mind?
Things such as this: to know a man is surely a different knowledge from knowing a lyre.
Well, you know what happens to lovers: whenever they see a lyre, a garment or anything else that their beloved is accustomed to use, they know the lyre, and the image of the boy to whom it belongs comes into their mind.
This is recollection, just as someone, on seeing Simmias, often recollects Cebes, and there are thousands of other such occurrences.
Thousands indeed, said Simmias.
Is this kind of thing not recollection of a kind, he said, especially so when one experiences it about things that one had forgotten, because one had not seen them for some time?
Further, he said, can a man seeing the picture of a horse or a lyre recollect a man, or seeing a picture of Simmias recollect Cebes?
Or seeing a picture of Simmias, recollect Simmias himself?
In all these cases the recollection can be occasioned by things that are similar, but it can also be occasioned by things that are dissimilar?
When the recollection is caused by similar things, must one not of necessity also experience this: to consider whether the similarity to that which one recollects is deficient in any respect or complete?
Consider, he said, whether this is the case: we say that there is something that is equal.
I do not mean a stick equal to a stick or a stone to a stone,.
, where Socrates does precisely that.
Phaedo or anything of that kind, but something else beyond all these, the Equal itself.
Shall we say that this exists or not?
Indeed we shall, by Zeus, said Simmias, most definitely.
And do we know what this is?
Whence have we acquired the knowledge of it?
Is it not from the things we mentioned just now, from seeing sticks or stones or some other things that are equal we come to think of that other which is different from them?
Or doesn't it seem to you to be different?
Look at it also this way: do not equal stones and sticks sometimes, while remaining the same, appear to one to be equal and to another to be unequal?
But what of the equals themselves?
Have they ever appeared unequal to you, or Equality to be Inequality?
These equal things and the Equal itself are therefore not the same?
I do not think they are the same at all, Socrates.
But it is definitely from the equal things, though they are different from that Equal, that you have derived and grasped the knowledge of equality?
Very true, Socrates.
Whether it be like them or unlike them?
As long as the sight of one thing makes you think of another, whether it be similar or dissimilar, this must of necessity be recollection?
Well then, he said, do we experience something like this in the case of equal sticks and the other equal objects we just mentioned?
Do they seem to us to be equal in the same sense as what is Equal itself?
Is there some deficiency in their being such as the Equal, or is there not?
A considerable deficiency, he said.
Whenever someone, on seeing something, realizes that that which he now sees wants to be like some other reality but falls short and cannot be like that other since it is inferior, do we agree that the one who thinks this must have prior knowledge of that to which he says it is like, but deficiently so?
Well, do we also experience this about the equal objects and the Equal itself, or do we not?
We must then possess knowledge of the Equal before that time when we first saw the equal objects and realized that all these objects strive to be like the Equal but are deficient in this.
Then surely we also agree that this conception of ours derives from seeing or touching or some other sense perception, and cannot come into our mind in any other way, for all these senses, I say, are the same.
They are the same, Socrates, at any rate in respect to that which our argument wishes to make plain.
Our sense perceptions must surely make us realize that all that we perceive through them is striving to reach that which is Equal but falls short of it; or how do we express it?
Then before we began to see or hear or otherwise perceive, we must have possessed knowledge of the Equal itself if we were about to refer our sense perceptions of equal objects to it, and realized that all of them were eager to be like it, but were inferior.
That follows from what has been said, Socrates.
But we began to see and hear and otherwise perceive right after birth?
We must then have acquired the knowledge of the Equal before this.
It seems then that we must have possessed it before birth.
Therefore, if we had this knowledge, we knew before birth and immediately after not only the Equal, but the Greater and the Smaller and all such things, for our present argument is no more about the Equal than about the Beautiful itself, the Good itself, the Just, the Pious and, as I say, about all those things which we mark with the seal of 'what it is,' both when we are putting questions and answering them.
So we must have acquired knowledge of them all before we were born.
If, having acquired this knowledge in each case, we have not forgotten it, we remain knowing and have knowledge throughout our life, for to know is to acquire knowledge, keep it and not lose it.
Do we not call the losing of knowledge forgetting?
Most certainly, Socrates, he said.
But, I think, if we acquired this knowledge before birth, then lost it at birth, and then later by the use of our senses in connection with those objects we mentioned, we recovered the knowledge we had before, would not what we call
learning be the recovery of our own knowledge, and we are right to call this recollection?
It was seen to be possible for someone to see or hear or otherwise perceive something, and by this to be put in mind of something else which he had forgotten and which is related to it by similarity or difference.
One of two things follows, as I say: either we were born with the knowledge of it, and all of us know it throughout life, or those who later, we say, are learning, are only recollecting, and learning would be recollection.
That is certainly the case, Socrates.
Which alternative do you choose, Simmias?
That we are born with this knowledge or that we recollect later the things of which we had knowledge previously?
I have no means of choosing at the moment, Socrates.
Well, can you make this choice?
What is your opinion about it?
A man who has knowledge would be able to give an account of what he knows, or would he not?
He must certainly be able to do so, Socrates, he said.
And do you think everybody can give an account of the things we were mentioning just now?
I wish they could, said Simmias, but I'm afraid it is much more likely that by this time tomorrow there will be no one left who can do so adequately.
So you do not think that everybody has knowledge of those things?
So they recollect what they once learned?
When did our souls acquire the knowledge of them?
Certainly not since we were born as men.
So then, Simmias, our souls also existed apart from the body before they took on human form, and they had intelligence.
Unless we acquire the knowledge at the moment of birth, Socrates, for that time is still left to us.
Quite so, my friend, but at what other time do we lose it?
We just now agreed that we are not born with that knowledge.
Do we then lose it at the very time we acquire it, or can you mention any other time?
I did not realize that I was talking nonsense.
So this is our position, Simmias?
If those realities we are always talking about exist, the Beautiful and the Good and
all that kind of reality, and
we refer all the things we perceive to that reality, discovering that it existed before and is ours, and we compare these things with it, then, just as they exist, so our soul must exist before we are born.
If these realities do not exist, then this argument is altogether futile.
Is this the position, that there is an equal necessity for those realities to exist, and for our souls to exist before we were born?
If the former do not exist, neither do the latter?
I do not think, Socrates, said Simmias, that there is any possible doubt that it is equally necessary for both to exist, and it is opportune that our argument comes to the conclusion that our soul exists before we are born, and equally so that reality of which you are now speaking.
Nothing is so evident to me personally as that all such things must certainly exist, the Beautiful, the Good, and all those you mentioned just now.
I also think that sufficient proof of this has been given.
Then what about Cebes?
said Socrates, for we must persuade Cebes also.
He is sufficiently convinced I think, said Simmias, though he is the most difficult of men to persuade by argument, but I believe him to be fully convinced that our soul existed before we were born.
I do not think myself, however, that it has been proved that the soul continues to exist after Phaedo death; the opinion of the majority which Cebes mentioned still stands, that when a man dies his soul is dispersed and this is the end of its existence.
What is to prevent the soul coming to be and being constituted from some other source, existing before it enters a human body and then, having done so and departed from it, itself dying and being destroyed?
You are right, Simmias, said Cebes.
Half of what needed proof has been proved, namely, that our soul existed before we were born, but further proof is needed that it exists no less after we have died, if the proof is to be complete.
It has been proved even now, Simmias and Cebes, said Socrates, if you are ready to combine this argument with the one we agreed on before, that every living thing must come from the dead.
If the soul exists before, it must,
as it comes to life and birth, come from nowhere else than death and being dead, so how could it avoid existing after death since it must be born again?
What you speak of has then even now been proved.
However, I think you and Simmias would like to discuss the argument more fully.
You seem to have this childish fear that the wind would really dissolve and scatter the soul, as it leaves the body, especially if one happens to die in a high wind and not in calm weather.
Cebes laughed and said: Assuming that we were afraid, Socrates, try to change our minds, or rather do not assume that we are afraid, but perhaps there is a child in us who has these fears; try to persuade him not to fear death like a bogey.
You should, said Socrates, sing a charm over him every day until you have charmed away his fears.
Where shall we find a good charmer for these fears, Socrates, he said, now that you are leaving us?
Greece is a large country, Cebes, he said, and there are good men in it; the tribes of foreigners are also numerous.
You should search for such a charmer among them all, sparing neither trouble nor expense, for there is nothing on which you could spend your money to greater advantage.
You must also search among yourselves, for you might not easily find people who could do this better than yourselves.
That shall be done, said Cebes, but let us, if it pleases you, go back to the argument where we left it.
Of course it pleases me.
We must then ask ourselves something like this: what kind of thing is likely to be scattered?
On behalf of what kind of thing should one fear this, and for what kind of thing should one not fear it?
We should then examine to which class the soul belongs, and as a result either fear for the soul or be of good cheer.
Is not anything that is composite and a compound by nature liable to be split up into its component parts, and only that which is noncomposite, if anything, is not likely to be split up?
I think that is the case, said Cebes.
Are not the things that always remain the same and in the same state most likely not to be composite, whereas those that vary from one time to another and are never the same are composite?
Let us then return to those same things with which we were dealing earlier, to that reality of whose existence we are giving an account in our questions and answers; are they ever the same and in the same state, or do they vary from one time to another; can the Equal itself, the Beautiful itself, each thing in itself, the real, ever be affected by any change whatever?
Or does each of them that really is, being uniform by itself, remain the same and never in any way tolerate any change whatever?
It must remain the same, said Cebes, and in the same state, Socrates.
What of the many beautiful particulars, be they men, horses, clothes, or other such things, or the many equal particulars, and all those which bear the same name as those others?
Do they remain the same or, in total contrast to those other realities
, one might say, never in any way remain the same as themselves or in relation to each other?
The latter is the case; they are never in the same state.
These latter you could touch and see and perceive with the other senses, but those that always remain the same can be grasped only by the reasoning power of the mind?
They are not seen but are invisible?
That is altogether true, he said.
Do you then want us to assume two kinds of existences, the visible and the invisible?
And the invisible always remains the same, whereas the visible never does?
Let us assume that too.
Now one part of ourselves is the body, another part is the soul?
To which class of existence do we say the body is more alike and akin?
To the visible, as anyone can see.
Is it visible or invisible?
It is not visible to men, Socrates, he said.
Well, we meant visible and invisible to human eyes; or to any others, do you think?
Then what do we say about the soul?
Is it visible or not visible?
So the soul is more like the invisible than the body, and the body more like the visible?
Without any doubt, Socrates.
Haven't we also said some time ago that when the soul makes use of the body to investigate something, be it through hearing or seeing or some other sense for to investigate something through the body is to do it Phaedo through the senses it is dragged by the body to the things that are never the same, and the soul itself strays and is confused and dizzy, as if it were drunk, in so far as it is in contact with that kind of thing?
But when the soul investigates by itself it passes into the realm of what is pure, ever existing, immortal and unchanging, and being akin to this, it always stays with it whenever it is by itself and can do so; it ceases to stray and remains in the same state as it is in touch with things of the same kind, and its experience then is what is called wisdom?
Altogether well said and very true, Socrates, he said.
Judging from what we have said before and what we are saying now, to which of these two kinds do you think that the soul is more alike and more akin?
I think, Socrates, he said, that on this line of argument any man, even the dullest, would agree that the soul is altogether more like that which always exists in the same state rather than like that which does not.
That is like the other.
Look at it also this way: when the soul and the body are together, nature orders the one to be subject and to be ruled, and the other to rule and be master.
Then again, which do you think is like the divine and
which like the mortal?
Do you not think that the nature of the divine is to rule and to lead, whereas it is that of the mortal to be ruled and be subject?
Which does the soul resemble?
Obviously, Socrates, the soul resembles the divine, and the body resembles the mortal.
Consider then, Cebes, whether it follows from all that has been said that the soul is most like the divine, deathless, intelligible, uniform, indissoluble, always the same as itself, whereas the body is most like that which is human, mortal, multiform, unintelligible, soluble and never consistently the same.
Have we anything else to say to show, my dear Cebes, that this is not the case?
Well then, that being so, is it not natural for the body to dissolve easily, and for the soul to be altogether indissoluble, or nearly so?
You realize, he said, that when a man dies, the visible part, the body, which exists in the visible world, and which we call the corpse, whose natural lot it would be to dissolve, fall apart and be blown away, does not immediately suffer any of these things but remains for a fair time, in fact, quite a long time if the man dies with his body in a suitable condition and at a favorable season?
If the body is emaciated or embalmed, as in Egypt, it remains almost whole for a remarkable length of time, and even if the body decays, some parts of it, namely bones and sinews and the like, are nevertheless, one might say, deathless.
Phaedo Will the soul, the invisible part which makes its way to a region of the same kind, noble and pure and invisible, to Hades in fact, to the good and wise god whither, god willing, my soul must soon be going will the soul, being of this kind and nature, be scattered and destroyed on leaving the body, as the majority of men say?
Far from it, my dear Cebes and Simmias, but
what happens is much more like this: if it is pure when it leaves the body and drags nothing bodily with it, as it had no willing association with the body in life, but avoided it and gathered itself together by itself and always practiced this, which is no other than practising philosophy in the right way, in fact, training to die easily.
Or is this not training for death?
A soul in this state makes its way to the invisible, which is like itself, the divine and immortal and wise, and arriving there it can be happy, having rid itself of confusion, ignorance, fear, violent desires and the other human ills and, as is said of the initiates, truly spend the rest of time with the gods.
Shall we say this, Cebes, or something different?
This, by Zeus, said Cebes.
But I think that if the soul is polluted and impure when it leaves the body, having always been associated with it and served it, bewitched by physical desires and pleasures to the point at which nothing seems to exist for it but the physical, which one can touch and see or eat and drink or make use of for sexual enjoyment, and if that soul is accustomed to hate and fear and avoid that which is dim and invisible to the eyes but intelligible and to be grasped by philosophy
do you think such a soul will escape pure and by itself?
Impossible, he said.
It is no doubt permeated by the physical, which constant intercourse and association with the body, as well as considerable practice, has caused to become ingrained in it?
We must believe, my friend, that this bodily element is heavy, ponderous, earthy and visible.
Through it, such a soul has become heavy and is dragged back to the visible region in fear of the unseen and of Hades.
It wanders, as we are told, around graves and monuments, where shadowy phantoms, images that such souls produce, have been seen, souls that have not been freed and purified but share in the visible, and are therefore seen.
That is likely, Socrates.
It is indeed, Cebes.
Moreover, these are not the souls of good but of inferior men, which are forced to wander there, paying the penalty for their previous bad upbringing.
They wander until their longing for that which accompanies them, the physical, again imprisons them in a body, and they are then, as is likely, bound to such characters as they have practiced in their life.
What kind of characters do you say these are, Socrates?
Those, for example, who have carelessly practiced gluttony, violence and drunkenness are likely to join a company of donkeys or of similar animals.
Those who have esteemed injustice highly, and tyranny and plunder will join the tribes of wolves and hawks and kites, or where else shall we say that they go?
Certainly to those, said Cebes.
And clearly, the destination of the others will conform to the way in which they have behaved?
The happiest of these, who will also have the best destination, are those who have practiced popular and social virtue, which they call moderation and justice and which was developed by habit and practice, without philosophy or understanding?
How are they the happiest?
Because it is likely that they will again join a social and gentle group, either of bees or wasps or ants, and then again the same kind of human group, and so be moderate men.
No one may join the company of the gods who has not practiced philosophy and is not completely pure when he departs from life, no one but the lover of learning.
It is for this reason, my friends Simmias and Cebes, that those who practice philosophy in the right way keep away from all bodily passions, master them and do not surrender themselves to them; it is not at all for fear of wasting their substance and of poverty, which the majority and the money lovers fear, nor for fear of dishonor and ill repute, like the ambitious and lovers of honors, that they keep away from them.
That would not be natural for them, Socrates, said Cebes.
By Zeus, no, he said.
Those who care for their own soul and do not live for the service of their body dismiss all these things.
They do not travel the same road as those who do not know where they are going but, believing that nothing should be done contrary to philosophy and their deliverance and purification, they turn to this and follow wherever philosophy leads.
I will tell you, he said.
The lovers of learning know that when philosophy gets hold of their soul, it is imprisoned in and clinging to the body, and that it is forced to examine other things through it as through a cage and not by itself, and that it wallows in every kind of ignorance.
Philosophy sees that the worst feature of this imprisonment is that it is due to desires, so that the prisoner himself is contributing to his own incarceration most of all.
As I say, the lovers of learning know that philosophy gets hold of their soul when it is in that state, then gently encourages it and tries to free it by showing them that investigation through the eyes is full of deceit, as is that through the ears and the other senses.
Philosophy then persuades the soul to withdraw from the senses in so far as it is not compelled to use them and bids the soul to gather itself together by itself, to trust only itself and whatever reality, existing by itself, the soul by itself understands, Phaedo and not to consider as true whatever it examines by other means, for this is different in different circumstances and is sensible and visible, whereas what the soul itself sees is intelligible and invisible.
The soul of the true philosopher thinks that this deliverance must not be opposed and so keeps away from pleasures and desires and pains as far as he can; he reflects that violent pleasure or pain or passion does not cause merely such evils as one might expect, such as one suffers when one has been sick or extravagant through desire, but the greatest and most extreme evil, though one does not reflect on this.
What is that, Socrates?
That the soul of every man, when it feels violent pleasure or pain in connection with some object, inevitably believes at the same time that what causes such feelings must be very clear and very true, which it is not.
Such objects are mostly visible, are they not?
And doesn't such an experience tie the soul to the body most completely?
Because every pleasure or pain provides, as it were, another nail to rivet the soul to the body and to weld them together.
It makes the soul corporeal, so that it believes that truth is what the body says it is.
As it shares the beliefs and delights of the body, I think it inevitably comes to share its ways and manner of life and is unable ever to reach Hades in a pure state; it is always full of body when it departs, so that it soon falls back into another body and grows with it as if it had been sewn into it.
Because of this, it can have no part in the company of the divine, the pure and uniform.
What you say is very true, Socrates, said Cebes.
This is why genuine lovers of learning are moderate and brave, or do you think it is for the reasons the majority says they are?
This is how the soul of a philosopher would reason: it would not think that while philosophy must free it, it should while being freed surrender itself to pleasures and pains and imprison itself again, thus laboring in vain like Penelope at her web.
The soul of the philosopher achieves a calm from such emotions; it follows reason and ever stays with it contemplating the true, the divine, which is not the object of opinion.
Nurtured by this, it believes that one should live in this manner as long as one is alive and, after death, arrive at what is akin and of the same kind, and escape from human evils.
After such nurture there is no danger, Simmias and Cebes, that one should fear that, on parting from the body, the soul would be scattered and dissipated by the winds and no longer be anything anywhere.
When Socrates finished speaking there was a long silence.
He appeared to be concentrating on what had been said, and so were most of us.
But Cebes and Simmias were whispering to each other.
Socrates observed them and questioned them.
Come, he said, do you think there is something Phaedo lacking in my argument?
There are still many doubtful points and many objections for anyone who wants a thorough discussion of these matters.
If you are discussing some other subject, I have nothing to say, but if you have some difficulty about this one, do not hesitate to speak for yourselves and expound it if you think the argument could be improved, and if you think you will do better, take me along with you in the discussion.
I will tell you the truth, Socrates, said Simmias.
Both of us have been in difficulty for some time, and each of us has been urging the other to question you because we wanted to hear what you would say, but we hesitated to bother you, lest it be displeasing to you in your present misfortune.
When Socrates heard this he laughed quietly and said: 'Really, Simmias, it would be hard for me to persuade other people that I do not consider my present fate a misfortune if I cannot persuade even you, and you are afraid that it is more difficult to deal with me than before.
You seem to think me inferior to the swans in prophecy.
They sing before too, but when they realize that they must die they sing most and most beautifully, as they rejoice that they are about to depart to join the god whose servants they are.
But men, because of their own fear of death, tell lies about the swans and say that they lament their death and sing in sorrow.
They do not reflect that no bird sings when it is hungry or cold or suffers in any other way, neither the nightingale nor the swallow nor the hoopoe, though they do say that these sing laments when in pain.
Nor do the swans, but I believe that as they belong to Apollo, they are prophetic, have knowledge of the future and sing of the blessings of the underworld, sing and rejoice on that day beyond what they did before.
As I believe myself to be a fellow servant with the swans and dedicated to the same god, and have received from my master a gift of prophecy not inferior to theirs, I am no more despondent than they on leaving life.
Therefore, you must speak and ask whatever you want as long as the authorities allow it.'
Well spoken, said Simmias.
I will tell you my difficulty, and then Cebes will say why he does not accept what was said.
I believe, as perhaps you do, that precise knowledge on that subject is impossible or extremely difficult in our present life, but that it surely shows a very poor spirit not to examine thoroughly what is said about it, and to desist before one is exhausted by an all round investigation.
One should achieve one of these things: learn the truth about these things or find it for oneself, or, if that is impossible, adopt the best and most irrefutable of men's theories, and, borne upon this, sail through the dangers of life as upon a raft, unless someone should make that journey safer and less risky upon a firmer vessel of some divine doctrine.
So even now, since you have said what you did, I will feel no shame at asking questions, and I will not blame myself in the future because I did not say what I think.
As I examine what we said, both by myself and with Cebes, it does not seem to be adequate.
Said Socrates: 'You may well be right, my friend, but tell me how it is inadequate.'
In this way, as it seems to me, he said: 'One might make the same argument about harmony, lyre and strings, that a harmony is something invisible, without body, beautiful and divine in the attuned lyre, whereas the lyre itself and its strings are physical, bodily, composite, earthy and akin to what is mortal.
Then if someone breaks the lyre, cuts or breaks the strings and then insists, using the same argument as you, that the harmony must still exist and is not destroyed because it would be impossible for the lyre and the strings, which are mortal, still to exist when the strings are broken, and for the harmony, which is akin and of the same nature as the divine and immortal, to be destroyed before that which is mortal; he would say that the harmony itself still must exist and that the wood and the strings must rot before the harmony can suffer.
And indeed Socrates, I think you must have this in mind, that we really do suppose the soul to be something of this kind; as the body is stretched and held together by the hot and the cold, the dry and the moist and other such things, and our soul is a mixture and harmony of those things when they are mixed with each other rightly and in due measure.
If then the soul is a kind of harmony or attunement, clearly, when our body is relaxed or stretched without due measure by diseases and other evils, the soul must immediately be destroyed, even if it be most divine, as are the other harmonies found in music and all the works of artists, and the remains of each body last for a long time until they rot or are burned.
Consider what we shall say in answer to one who deems the soul to be a mixture of bodily elements and to be the first to perish in the process we call death.'
Socrates looked at us keenly, as was his habit, smiled and said: 'What Simmias says is quite fair.
If one of you is more resourceful than I am, why did he not answer him, for he seems to have handled the argument competently.
However, I think that before we answer him, we should hear Cebes' objection, in order that we may have time to deliberate on an answer.
When we have heard him we should either agree with them, if we think them in tune with us or, if not, defend our own argument.
What is troubling you?'
I tell you, said Cebes, the argument seems to me to be at the same point as before and open to the same objection.
I do not deny that it has been very elegantly
and, if it is not offensive to say so, sufficiently proved that our soul existed before it took on this present form, but I do not believe the same applies to its existing somewhere after our death.
Not that I agree with Simmias' objection that the soul is not stronger and much more lasting than the body, for I think it is superior in all these respects. '
Why then,' the argument might say, 'are you still unconvinced?
Since you see that when the man dies, the weaker part continues to exist, do you not think that the more lasting part must be preserved during that time?'
On this point consider whether what I say makes sense.
Like Simmias, I too need an image, for I think this argument is much as if one said at the death of an old weaver that the man had not perished but was safe and sound somewhere, and offered as proof the fact that the Phaedo cloak the old man had woven himself and was wearing was still sound and had not perished.
If one was not convinced, he would be asked whether a man lasts longer than a cloak which is in use and being worn, and if the answer was that a man lasts much longer, this would be taken as proof that the man was definitely safe and sound, since the more temporary thing had not perished.
But, Simmias, I do not think that is so, for consider what I say.
Anybody could see that the man who said this was talking nonsense.
That weaver had woven and worn out many such cloaks.
He perished after many of them, but before the last.
That does not mean that a man is inferior and weaker than a cloak.
The image illustrates, I think, the relationship of the soul to the body, and anyone who says the same thing about them would appear to me to be talking sense, that the soul lasts a long time while the body is weaker and more short lived.
He might say that each soul wears out many bodies, especially if it lives many years.
If the body were in a state of flux and perished while the man was still alive, and the soul wove afresh the body that is worn out, yet it would be inevitable that whenever the soul perished it would be wearing the last body it wove and perish only before this last.
Then when the soul perished, the body would show the weakness of its nature by soon decaying and disappearing.
So we cannot trust this argument and be confident that our soul continues to exist somewhere after our death.
For, if one were to concede, even more than you do, to a man using that argument, if one were to grant him not only that the soul exists in the time before we are born, but that there is no reason why the soul of some should not exist and continue to exist after our death, and thus frequently be born and die in turn; if one were to grant him that the soul's nature is so strong that it can survive many bodies, but if, having granted all this, one does not further agree that the soul is not damaged by its many births and is not, in the end, altogether destroyed in one of those deaths, he might say that no one knows which death and dissolution of the body brings about the destruction of the soul, since not one of us can be aware of this.
And in that case, any man who faces death with confidence is foolish, unless he can prove that the soul is altogether immortal.
If he cannot, a man about to die
must of necessity always fear for his soul, lest the present separation of the soul from the body bring about the complete destruction of the soul.
When we heard what they said we were all depressed, as we told each other afterwards.
We had been quite convinced by the previous argument, and they seemed to confuse us again, and to drive us to doubt not only what had already been said but also what was going to be said, lest we be worthless as critics or the subject itself admitted of no certainty.
By the gods, Phaedo, you have my sympathy, for as I listen to you now I find myself saying to myself: 'What argument shall we trust, now that that of Socrates, which was extremely convincing, has fallen into discredit?'
The statement that the soul is some kind of harmony has a remarkable hold on me, now and always, and when it was mentioned it
Phaedo reminded me that I had myself previously thought so.
And now I am again quite in need, as if from the beginning, of some other argument to convince me that the soul does not die along with the man.
Tell me then, by Zeus, how Socrates tackled the argument.
Was he obviously distressed, as you say you people were, or was he not, but quietly came to the rescue of his argument, and did he do so satisfactorily or inadequately?
Tell us everything as precisely as you can.
I have certainly often admired Socrates, Echecrates, but never more than on this occasion.
That he had a reply was perhaps not strange.
What I wondered at most in him was the pleasant, kind and admiring way he received the young men's argument, and how sharply he was aware of the effect the discussion had on us, and then how well he healed our distress and, as it were, recalled us from our flight and defeat and turned us around to join him in the examination of their argument.
I happened to be sitting on his right by the couch on a low stool, so that he was sitting well above me.
He stroked my head and pressed the hair on the back of my neck, for he was in the habit of playing with my hair at times. '
Tomorrow, Phaedo,' he said, 'you will probably cut this beautiful hair.'
Likely enough, Socrates, I said.
Not if you take my advice, he said.
It is today, he said, that I shall cut my hair and you yours, if our argument dies on us, and we cannot revive it.
If I were you, and the argument escaped me, I would take an oath, as the Argives did, not to let my hair grow before I fought again and defeated the argument of Simmias and Cebes.
But, I said, they say that not even Heracles could fight two people.
Then call on me as your Iolaus, as long as the daylight lasts.
I shall call on you, but in this case as Iolaus calling on Heracles.
It makes no difference, he said, but first there is a certain experience we must be careful to avoid.
That we should not become misologues, as people become misanthropes.
There is no greater evil one can suffer than to hate reasonable discourse.
Misology and misanthropy arise in the same way.
Misanthropy comes when a man without knowledge or skill has placed great trust in someone and believes him to be altogether truthful, sound and trustworthy; then, a short time afterwards he finds him to be wicked and unreliable, and then this happens in another case; when one has frequently had that experience, especially with those whom one believed to be one's closest friends, then, in the end, after many such blows, one comes to hate all men and to believe that no one is sound in any way at all.
Have you not seen this happen?
Phaedo I surely have, I said.
This is a shameful state of affairs, he said, and obviously due to an attempt to have human relations without any skill in human affairs, for such skill would lead one to believe, what is in fact true, that the very good and the very wicked are both quite rare, and that most men are between those extremes.
The same as with the very tall and the very short, he said.
Do you think anything is rarer than to find an extremely tall man or an extremely short one?
Or a dog or anything else
Or again, one extremely swift or extremely slow, ugly or beautiful, white or black?
Are you not aware that in all those cases the most extreme at either end are rare and few, but those in between are many and plentiful?
Therefore, he said, if a contest of wickedness were established, there too the winners, you think, would be very few?
That is likely, said I. Likely indeed, he said, but arguments are not like men in this particular.
I was merely following your lead just now.
The similarity lies rather in this: it is as when one who lacks skill in arguments puts his trust in an argument as being true, then shortly afterwards believes it to be false as sometimes
it is and sometimes it is not
and so with another argument and then another.
You know how those in particular who spend their time studying contradiction in the end believe themselves to have become very wise and that they alone have understood that there is no soundness or reliability in any object or in any argument, but that all that exists simply fluctuates up and down as if it were in the Eurip and does not remain in the same place for any time at all.
What you say, I said, is certainly true.
It would be pitiable, Phaedo, he said, when there is a true and reliable argument and one that can be understood, if a man who has dealt with such arguments as appear at one time true, at another time untrue, should not blame himself or his own lack of skill
but, because of his distress, in the end gladly shift the blame away from himself to the arguments, and spend the rest of his life hating and reviling reasonable discussion and so be deprived of truth and knowledge of reality.
Yes, by Zeus, I said, that would be pitiable indeed.
This then is the first thing we should guard against, he said.
We should not allow into our minds the conviction that argumentation has nothing sound about it; much rather we should believe that it is we who are not yet sound and that we must take courage and be eager to attain soundness, you and the others for the sake of your whole life still to come, and I for the sake of death itself.
I am in danger at this moment of not having a.
The Euripus is the straits between the island of Euboea and Boeotia on the Greek mainland; its currents were both violent and variable.
Phaedo philosophical attitude about this, but like those who are quite uneducated, I am eager to get the better of you in argument, for the uneducated, when they engage in argument about anything, give no thought to the truth about the subject of discussion but are only eager that those present will accept the position they have set forth.
I differ from them only to this extent: I shall not be eager to get the agreement of those present that what I say is true, except incidentally, but I shall be very eager that I should myself be thoroughly convinced that things are so.
For I am thinking see in how contentious a spirit that if what I say is true, it is a fine thing to be convinced; if, on the other hand, nothing exists after death, at least for this time before I die
I shall distress those present less with lamentations, and my folly will not continue to exist along with me that would be a bad thing but will come to an end in a short time.
Thus prepared, Simmias and Cebes, he said, I come to deal with your argument.
If you will take my advice, you will give but little thought to Socrates but much more to the truth.
If you think that what I say is true, agree with me; if not, oppose it with every argument and take care that in my eagerness I do not deceive myself and you and, like a bee, leave my sting in you when I go.
We must proceed, he said, and first remind me of what you said if I do not appear to remember it.
Simmias, as I believe, is in doubt and fear that the soul, though it is more divine and beautiful than the body, yet predeceases it, being a kind of harmony.
Cebes, I thought, agrees with me that the soul lasts much longer than the body, but that no one knows whether the soul often wears out many bodies and then, on leaving its last body, is now itself destroyed.
This then is death, the destruction of the soul, since the body is always being destroyed.
Are these the questions, Simmias and Cebes, which we must investigate?
They both agreed that they were.
Do you then, he asked, reject all our previous statements, or some but not others?
Some, they both said, but not others.
What, he said, about the statements we made that learning is recollection and that, if this was so, our soul must of necessity exist elsewhere before us, before it was imprisoned in the body?
For myself, said Cebes, I was wonderfully convinced by it at the time
and I stand by it now also, more than by any other statement.
That, said Simmias, is also my position, and I should be very surprised if I ever changed my opinion about this.
But you must change your opinion, my Theban friend, said Socrates, if you still believe that a harmony is a composite thing, and that the soul is a kind of harmony of the elements of the body in a state of tension, for surely you will not allow yourself to maintain that a composite harmony existed before those elements from which it had to be composed, or would you?
Never, Socrates, he said.
Do you realize, he said, that this is what you are in fact saying when you state that the soul exists before it takes on the form and body of a Phaedo man and that it is composed of elements which do not yet exist?
A harmony is not like that to which you compare it; the lyre and the strings and the notes, though still unharmonized, exist; the harmony is composed last of all, and is the first to be destroyed.
How will you harmonize this statement with your former one?
In no way, said Simmias.
And surely, he said, a statement about harmony should do so more than any other.
It should, said Simmias.
So your statement is inconsistent?
Consider which of your statements you prefer, that learning is recollection or that the soul is a harmony.
I much prefer the former, Socrates.
I adopted the latter without proof, because of a certain probability and plausibility, which is why it appeals to most men.
I know that arguments of which the proof is based on probability are pretentious and, if one does not guard against them, they certainly deceive one, in geometry and everything else.
The theory of recollection and learning, however, was based on an assumption worthy of acceptance, for our soul was said to exist also before it came into the body, just as the reality does that is of the kind that we qualify by the words 'what it is,' and I convinced myself that I was quite correct to accept it.
Therefore, I cannot accept the theory that the soul is a harmony either from myself or anyone else.
What of this, Simmias?
Do you think it natural for a harmony, or any other composite, to be in a different state from that of the elements of which it is composed?
Not at all, said Simmias.
Nor, as I think, can it act or be acted upon in a different way than its elements?
One must therefore suppose that a harmony does not direct its components, but is directed by them.
A harmony is therefore far from making a movement, or uttering a sound, or doing anything else, in a manner contrary to that of its parts.
Far from it indeed, he said.
Does not the nature of each harmony depend on the way it has been harmonized?
I do not understand, he said.
Will it not, if it is more and more fully harmonized, be more and more fully a harmony, and if it is less and less fully harmonized, it will be less and less fully a harmony?
Can this be true about the soul, that one soul is more and more fully a soul than another, or is less and less fully a soul, even to the smallest extent?
Phaedo Come now, by Zeus, he said.
One soul is said to have intelligence and virtue and to be good, another to have folly and wickedness and to be bad.
Are those things truly said?
What will someone who holds the theory that the soul is a harmony say that those things are which reside in the soul, that is, virtue and wickedness?
Are these some other harmony and disharmony?
That the good soul is harmonized and, being a harmony, has within itself another harmony, whereas the evil soul is both itself a lack of harmony and has no other within itself?
I don't know what to say, said Simmias, but one who holds that assumption must obviously say something of that kind.
We have previously agreed, he said, that one soul is not more and not less a soul than another, and this means that one harmony is not more and more fully, or less and less fully, a harmony than another.
Now that which is no more and no less a harmony is not more or less harmonized.
Can that which is neither more nor less harmonized partake more or less of harmony, or does it do so equally?
Then if a soul is neither more nor less a soul than another, it has been harmonized to the same extent?
If that is so, it would have no greater share of disharmony or of harmony?
That being the case, could one soul have more wickedness or virtue than another, if wickedness is disharmony and virtue harmony?
But rather, Simmias, according to correct reasoning, no soul, if it is a harmony, will have any share of wickedness, for harmony is surely altogether this very thing, harmony, and would never share in disharmony.
It certainly would not.
Nor would a soul, being altogether this very thing, a soul, share in wickedness?
How could it, in view of what has been said?
So it follows from this argument that all the souls of all living creatures will be equally good, if souls are by nature equally this very thing, souls.
Does our argument seem right, he said, and does it seem that it should have come to this, if the hypothesis that the soul is a harmony was correct?
Not in any way, he said.
Further, of all the parts of a man, can you mention any other part that rules him than his soul, especially if it is a wise soul?
Does it do so by following the affections of the body or by opposing them?
I mean, for example, that when the body is hot and thirsty the soul draws him to the opposite, to not drinking; when the body is hungry, to not eating, and we see a thousand other examples of the soul opposing the affections of the body.
On the other hand we previously agreed that if the soul were a harmony, it would never be out of tune with the stress and relaxation and the striking of the strings or anything else done to its composing elements, but that it would follow and never direct them?
We did so agree, of course.
Well, does it now appear to do quite the opposite, ruling over all the elements of which one says it is composed, opposing nearly all of them throughout life, directing all their ways, inflicting harsh and painful punishment on them, at times in physical culture and medicine, at other times more gently by threats and exhortations, holding converse with desires and passions and fears as if it were one thing talking to a different one, as Homer wrote somewhere in the Odyssey where he says that Odysseus 'struck his breast and rebuked his heart saying, 'Endure, my heart, you have endured worse than this' '?
Do you think that when he composed this the poet thought that his soul was a harmony, a thing to be directed by the affections of the body?
Did he not rather regard it as ruling over them and mastering them, itself a much more divine thing than a harmony?
Yes, by Zeus, I think so, Socrates.
Therefore, my good friend, it is quite wrong for us to say that the soul is a harmony, and in saying so we would disagree both with the divine poet Homer and with ourselves.
Very well, said Socrates.
Harmonia of Thebes seems somehow reasonably propitious to us.
How and by what argument, my dear Cebes, can we propitiate Cadmus?
I think, Cebes said, that you will find a way.
You dealt with the argument about harmony in a manner that was quite astonishing to me.
When Simmias was speaking of his difficulties I was very much wondering whether anyone would be able to deal with his argument, and I was quite dumbfounded when right away he could not resist your argument's first onslaught.
I should not wonder therefore if that of Cadmus suffered the same fate.
Harmonia was in legend the wife of Cadmus, the founder of Thebes.
Socrates' punning joke is simply that, having dealt with Harmonia (harmony), we must now deal with Cadmus (i.e., Cebes, the other Theban).
My good sir, said Socrates, do not boast, lest some malign influence upset the argument we are about to make.
However, we leave that to the care of the god, but let us come to grips with it in the Homeric fashion, to see if there is anything in what you say.
The sum of your problem is this: you consider that the soul must be proved to be immortal and indestructible before a philosopher on the point of death, who is confident that he will fare much better in the underworld than if he had led any other kind of life, can avoid being foolish and simple minded in this confidence.
To prove that the soul is strong, that it is divine, that it existed before we were born as men, all this, you say, does not show the soul to be immortal but only long lasting.
That it existed for a very long time before, that it knew much and acted much, makes it no more immortal because of that; indeed, its very entering into a human body was the beginning of its destruction, like a disease; it would live that life in distress and would in the end be destroyed in what we call death.
You say it makes no difference whether it enters a body once or many times as far as the fear of each of us is concerned, for it is natural for a man who is no fool to be afraid, if he does not know and cannot prove that the soul is immortal.
This, I think, is what you maintain, Cebes; I deliberately repeat it often, in order that no point may escape us, and that you may add or subtract something if you wish.
And Cebes said: 'There is nothing that I want to add or subtract at the moment.
That is what I say.'
Socrates paused for a long time, deep in thought.
He then said: 'This is no unimportant problem that you raise, Cebes, for it requires a thorough investigation of the cause of generation and destruction.
I will, if you wish, give you an account of my experience in these matters.
Then if something I say seems useful to you, make use of it to persuade us of your position.'
I surely do wish that, said Cebes.
Listen then, and I will, Cebes, he said.
When I was a young man I was wonderfully keen on that wisdom which they call natural science, for I thought it splendid to know the causes of everything, why it comes to be, why it perishes and why it exists.
I was often changing my mind in the investigation, in the first instance, of questions such as these: Are living creatures nurtured when heat and cold produce a kind of putrefaction, as some say?
Do we think with our blood, or air, or fire, or none of these, and does the brain provide our senses of hearing and sight and smell, from which come memory and opinion, and from memory and opinion which has become stable, comes knowledge?
Then again, as I investigated how these things perish and what happens to things in the sky and on the earth, finally I became convinced that I have no natural aptitude at all for that kind of investigation, and of this I will give you sufficient proof.
This investigation made me quite blind even to those things which I and others thought that I clearly knew before, so that I unlearned what I thought I knew before, about many other things and specifically about how men grew.
I thought before that it was obvious to anybody that men grew Phaedo through eating and drinking, for food adds flesh to flesh and bones to bones, and in the same way appropriate parts were added to all other parts of the body, so that the man grew from an earlier small bulk to a large bulk later, and so a small man became big.
That is what I thought then.
Do you not think it was reasonable?
Then further consider this: I thought my opinion was satisfactory, that when a large man stood by a small one he was taller by a head, and so a horse was taller than a horse.
Even clearer than this, I thought that ten was more than eight because two had been added, and that a two cubit length is larger than a cubit because it surpasses it by half its length.
And what do you think now about those things?
That I am far, by Zeus, from believing that I know the cause of any of those things.
I will not even allow myself to say that where one is added to one either the one to which it is added or the one that is added becomes two, or that the one added and the one to which it is added become two because of the addition of the one to the other.
I wonder that, when each of them is separate from the other, each of them is one, nor are they then two, but that, when they come near to one another, this is the cause of their becoming two, the coming together and being placed closer to one
Nor can I any longer be persuaded that when one thing is divided, this division is the cause of its becoming two, for just now the cause of becoming two was the opposite.
At that time it was their coming close together
and one was added to the other, but now it is because one is taken and separated from the other.
I do not any longer persuade myself that I know why a unit or anything else comes to be, or perishes or exists by the old method of investigation, and I do not accept it, but I have a confused method of my own.
One day I heard someone reading, as he said, from a book of Anaxagoras, and saying that it is Mind that directs and is the cause of everything.
I was delighted with this cause and it seemed to me good, in a way, that Mind should be the cause of all.
I thought that if this were so, the directing Mind would direct everything and arrange each thing in the way that was best.
If then one wished to know the cause of each thing, why it comes to be or perishes or exists, one had to find what was the best way for it to be, or to be acted upon, or to act.
On these premises then it befitted a man to investigate only, about this and other things, what is best.
The same man must inevitably also know what is worse, for that is part of the same knowledge.
As I reflected on this subject I was glad to think that I had found in Anaxagoras a teacher about the cause of things after my own heart, and that he would tell me, first, whether the earth is flat or round, and then would explain why it is so of necessity, saying which is better, and that it was better to be so.
If he said it was in the middle of the universe, he would go on to show that it was better for it to be in the middle, and if he showed me those things I should be prepared never to desire any other kind of cause.
I was ready to find out in the same way
Phaedo about the sun and the moon and the other heavenly bodies, about their relative speed, their turnings and whatever else happened to them, how it is best that each should act or be acted upon.
I never thought that Anaxagoras, who said that those things were directed by Mind, would bring in any other cause for them than that it was best for them to be as they are.
Once he had given the best for each as the cause for each and the general cause of all, I thought he would go on to explain the common good for all, and I would not have exchanged my hopes for a fortune.
I eagerly acquired his books and read them as quickly as I could in order to know the best and the worst as soon as possible.
This wonderful hope was dashed as I went on reading and saw that the man made no use of Mind, nor gave it any responsibility for the management of things, but mentioned as causes air and ether and water and many other strange things.
That seemed to me much like saying that Socrates' actions are all due to his mind, and then in trying to tell the causes of everything I do, to say that the reason that I am sitting here is because my body consists of bones and sinews, because the bones are hard and are separated by joints, that the sinews are such as to contract and relax, that they surround the bones along with flesh and skin which hold them together, then as the bones are hanging in their sockets, the relaxation and contraction of the sinews enable me to bend my limbs, and that is the cause of my sitting here with my limbs bent.
Again, he would mention other such causes for my talking to you: sounds and air and hearing, and a thousand other such things, but he would neglect to mention the true causes, that, after the Athenians decided it was better to condemn me, for this reason it seemed best to me to sit here
and more right to remain and to endure whatever penalty they ordered.
For by the dog, I think these sinews and bones could long ago have been in Megara or among the Boeotians, taken there by my belief as to the best course, if I had not thought it more right and honorable to endure whatever penalty the city ordered rather than escape and run away.
To call those things causes is too absurd.
If someone said that without bones and sinews and all such things, I should not be able to do what I decided, he would be right, but surely to say that they are the cause of what I do, and not that I have chosen the best course, even though I act with my mind, is to speak very lazily and carelessly.
Imagine not being able to distinguish the real cause from that without which the cause would not be able to act as a cause.
It is what the majority appear to do, like people groping in the dark; they call it a cause, thus giving it a name that does not belong to it.
That is why one man surrounds the earth with a vortex to make the heavens keep it in place, another makes the air support it like a wide lid.
As for their capacity of being in the best place they could possibly be put, this they do not look for, nor do they believe it to have any divine force, but they believe that they will some time discover a stronger and more immortal Atlas to hold everything together more, and they do not believe that the truly good and 'binding' binds and holds them together.
I would Phaedo gladly become the disciple of any man who taught the workings of that kind of cause.
However, since I was deprived and could neither discover it myself nor learn it from another, do you wish me to give you an explanation of how, as a second best, I busied myself with the search for the cause, Cebes?
I would wish it above all else, he said.
After this, he said, when I had wearied of investigating things, I thought that I must be careful to avoid the experience of those who watch an eclipse of the sun, for some of them ruin their eyes unless they watch its reflection in water or some such material.
A similar thought crossed my mind, and I feared that my soul would be altogether blinded if I looked at things with my eyes and tried to grasp them with each of my senses.
So I thought I must take refuge in discussions and investigate the truth of things by means of words.
However, perhaps this analogy is inadequate, for I certainly do not admit that one who investigates things by means of words is dealing with images any more than one who looks at facts.
However, I started in this manner: taking as my hypothesis in each case the theory that seemed to me the most compelling, I would consider as true, about cause and everything else, whatever agreed with this, and as untrue whatever did not so agree.
But I want to put my meaning more clearly,
for I do not think that you understand me now.
No, by Zeus, said Cebes, not very well.
This, he said, is what I mean.
It is nothing new, but what I have never stopped talking about, both elsewhere and in the earlier part of our conversation.
I am going to try to show you the kind of cause with which I have concerned myself.
I turn back to those oft mentioned things and proceed from them.
I assume the existence of a Beautiful, itself by itself, of a Good and a Great and all the rest.
If you grant me these and agree that they exist, I hope to show you the cause as a result, and to find the soul to be immortal.
Take it that I grant you this, said Cebes, and hasten to your conclusion.
Consider then, he said,
whether you share my opinion as to what follows, for I think that, if there is anything beautiful besides the Beautiful itself, it is beautiful for no other reason than that it shares in that Beautiful, and I say so with everything.
Do you agree to this sort of cause?
I no longer understand or recognize those other sophisticated causes, and if someone tells me that a thing is beautiful because it has a bright color or shape or any such thing, I ignore these other reasons for all these confuse me
but I simply, naively and perhaps foolishly cling to this, that nothing else makes it beautiful other than the presence of, or the sharing in, or however you may describe its relationship to that Beautiful
we mentioned, for I will not insist on the precise nature of the relationship, but that all beautiful things are beautiful by the Beautiful.
That, I think, is the safest answer I can give myself or anyone else.
And if I stick to this
I think I shall never fall into error.
This is the safe answer for me or anyone else to give, namely, that it is through Beauty that beautiful things are made beautiful.
Or do you not think so too?
And that it is through Bigness that big things are big and the bigger are bigger, and that smaller things are made small by Smallness?
And you would not accept the statement that one man is taller than another by a head and the shorter man shorter by the same, but you would bear witness that you mean nothing else than that everything that is bigger is made bigger by nothing else than by Bigness, and that is the cause of its being bigger, and the smaller is made smaller only by Smallness, and this is why it is smaller.
I think you would be afraid that some opposite argument would confront you if you said that someone is bigger or smaller by a head, first, because the bigger is bigger and the smaller smaller by the same, then because the bigger is bigger by a head which is small, and this would be strange, namely, that someone is made bigger by something small.
Would you not be afraid of this?
I certainly would, said Cebes, laughing.
Then you would be afraid to say that ten is more than eight by two, and that this is the cause of the excess, and not magnitude and because of magnitude, or that two cubits is bigger than one cubit by half and not by Bigness, for this is the same fear.
Then would you not avoid saying that when one is added to one it is the addition and when it is divided it is the division that is the cause of two?
And you would loudly exclaim that you do not know how else each thing can come to be except by sharing in the particular reality in which it shares, and in these cases you do not know of any other cause of becoming two except by sharing in Twoness, and that the things that are to be two must share in this, as that which is to be one must share in Oneness, and you would dismiss these additions and divisions and other such subtleties, and leave them to those wiser than yourself to answer.
But you, afraid, as they say, of your own shadow and your inexperience, would cling to the safety of your own hypothesis and give that answer.
If someone then attacked your hypothesis itself, you would ignore him and would not answer until you had examined whether the consequences that follow from it agree with one another or contradict one another.
And when you must give an account of your hypothesis itself you will proceed in the same way: you will assume another hypothesis, the one which seems to you best of the higher ones until you come to something acceptable, but you will not jumble the two as the debaters do by discussing the hypothesis and its consequences at the same time, if you wish to discover any truth.
This they do not discuss at all nor give any thought to, but their wisdom enables them to mix everything up and yet to be pleased with themselves, but if you are a philosopher I think you will do as I say.
What you say is very true, said Simmias and Cebes together.
Yes, by Zeus, Phaedo, and they were right; I think he made these things wonderfully clear to anyone of even small intelligence.
Alternatively: 'If someone should cling to your hypothesis itself, you would dismiss him and would not answer until you had examined whether the consequences that follow from it agree with one another or contradict one another.'
Yes indeed, Echecrates, and all those present thought so too.
And so do we who were not present but hear of it now.
What was said after that?
As I recall it, when the above had been accepted, and it was agreed that each of the Forms existed, and that other things acquired their name by having a share in them, he followed this up by asking: If you say these things are so, when you then say that Simmias is taller than Socrates but shorter than Phaedo, do you not mean that there is in Simmias both tallness and shortness?
But, he said, do you agree that the words of the statement '
Simmias is taller than Socrates' do not express the truth of the matter?
It is not, surely, the nature of Simmias to be taller than Socrates because he is Simmias but because of the tallness he happens to have?
Nor is he taller than Socrates because Socrates is Socrates, but because Socrates has smallness compared with the tallness of the other?
Nor is he shorter than Phaedo because Phaedo is Phaedo, but because Phaedo has tallness compared with the shortness of Simmias?
So then Simmias is called both short and tall, being between the two, presenting his shortness to be overcome by the tallness of one, and his tallness to overcome the shortness of the other.
He smilingly added, I seem to be going to talk like a book, but it is as I say.
My purpose is that you may agree with me.
Now it seems to me that not only Tallness itself is never willing to be tall and short at the same time, but also that the tallness in us will never admit the short or be overcome, but one of two things happens: either it flees and retreats whenever its opposite, the short, approaches, or it is destroyed by its approach.
It is not willing to endure and admit shortness and be other than it was, whereas I admit and endure shortness and still remain the same person and am this short man.
But Tallness, being tall, cannot venture to be small.
In the same way, the short in us is unwilling to become or to be tall ever, nor does any other of the opposites become or be its opposite while still being what it was; either it goes away or is destroyed when that happens.
I altogether agree, said Cebes.
When he heard this, someone of those present
I have no clear memory of who it was said: 'By the gods, did we not agree earlier in our discussi to the very opposite of what is now being said,
namely, that the larger came from the smaller and the smaller from the larger, and that this simply was how opposites came to be, from their opposites, but now I think we are saying that this would never happen?'
On hearing this, Socrates inclined his head towards the speaker and said: 'You have bravely reminded us, but you do not understand the difference between what is said now and what was said then, which was that an opposite thing came from an opposite thing; now we say that the.
The reference is to a above.
Phaedo opposite itself could never become opposite to itself, neither that in us nor that in nature.
Then, my friend, we were talking of things that have opposite qualities and naming these after them, but now we say that these opposites themselves, from the presence of which in them
things get their name, never can tolerate the coming to be from one another.'
At the same time he looked to Cebes and said: 'Does anything of what this man says also disturb you?'
Not at the moment, said Cebes, but I do not deny that many things do disturb me.
We are altogether agreed then, he said, that an opposite will never be opposite to itself.
Consider then whether you will agree to this further point.
There is something you call hot and something you call cold.
Are they the same as what you call snow and fire?
So the hot is something other than fire, and the cold is something other than snow?
You think, I believe, that being snow it will not admit the hot, as we said before, and remain what it was and be both snow and hot, but when the hot approaches it will either retreat before it or be destroyed.
So fire, as the cold approaches, will either go away or be destroyed
; it will never venture to admit coldness and remain what it was, fire and cold.
It is true then about some of these things that not only the Form itself deserves its own name for all time, but there is something else that is not the Form but has its character whenever it exists.
Perhaps I can make my meaning clearer: the Odd must always be given this name we now mention.
Is it the only one of existing things to be called odd this is my question or is there something else than the Odd which one must nevertheless also always call odd, as well as by its own name, because it is such by nature as never to be separated from the Odd?
I mean, for example, the number three and many others.
Consider three: do you not think that it must always be called both by its own name and by that of the Odd, which is not the same as three?
That is the nature of three, and of five, and of half of all the numbers; each of them is odd, but it is not the Odd.
Then again, two and four and the whole other column of numbers; each of them, while not being the same as the Even, is always even.
What I want to make clear is this: not only do those opposites not admit each other, but this is also true of those things which, while not being opposite to each other yet always contain the opposites, and it seems that these do not admit that Form which is opposite to that which is in them; when it approaches them, they either perish or give way.
Shall we not say that three will perish or undergo anything before, while remaining three, becoming even?
Certainly, said Cebes.
Yet surely two is not the opposite of three?
It is then not only opposite Forms that do not admit each other's approach, but also some other things that do not admit the onset of opposites.
Do you then want us, if we can, to define what these are?
Would they be the things that compel whatever they occupy not only to contain their Form but also always that of some opposite?
As we were saying just now, you surely know that what the Form of three occupies must not only be three but also odd.
And we say that the opposite Form to the Form that achieves this result could never come to it.
Now it is Oddness that has done this?
And opposite to this is the Form of the Even?
So then the Form of the Even will never come to three?
Then three has no share in the Even?
As for what I said we must define, that is, what kind of things, while not being opposites to something, yet do not admit the opposite, as, for example, the triad, though it is not the opposite of the Even, yet does not admit it because it always brings along the opposite of the Even, and so the dyad in relation to the Odd, fire to the Cold, and very many other things, see whether you would define it thus: Not only does the opposite not admit its opposite, but
that which brings along some opposite into that which it occupies; that which brings this along will not admit the opposite to that which it brings along.
Refresh your memory, it is no worse for being heard often.
Five does not admit the form of the Even, nor will ten, its double, admit the form of the Odd.
The double itself is an opposite of something else, yet
it will not admit the form of the Odd.
Nor do oneand a half and other such fractions admit the form of the Whole, nor will one third, and so on, if you follow me and agree to this.
I certainly agree, he said, and I follow you.
Tell me again from the beginning, he said, and do not answer in the words of the question, but do as I do.
I say that beyond that safe answer, which I spoke of first, I see another safe answer.
If you should ask me what, coming into a body, makes it hot, my reply would not be that safe and ignorant one, that it is heat, but our present argument provides a more sophisticated answer, namely, fire, and if you ask me what, on coming into a body, makes it sick, I will not say sickness but fever.
Nor, if asked the presence of what in a number makes it odd, I will not say oddness but oneness, and so with other things.
See if you now sufficiently understand what I want.
Answer me then, he said, what is it that, present in a body, makes it living?
And is that always so?
Whatever the soul occupies, it always brings life to it?
Is there, or is there not, an opposite to life?
So the soul will never admit the opposite of that which it brings along, as we agree from what has been said?
Most certainly, said Cebes.
Well, and what do we call that which does not admit the form of the even?
What do we call that
which will not admit the just and that which will not admit the musical?
The unmusical, and the other the unjust.
Very well, what do we call that which does not admit death?
The deathless, he said.
Now the soul does not admit death?
So the soul is deathless?
Shall we say that this has been proved, do you think?
Quite adequately proved, Socrates.
Well now, Cebes, he said, if the uneven were of necessity indestructible, surely three would be indestructible?
And if the non hot were of necessity indestructible, then whenever anyone brought heat to snow, the snow would retreat safe and unthawed, for it could not be destroyed, nor again could it stand its ground and admit the heat?
In the same way, if the non cold were indestructible, then when some cold attacked the fire, it would neither be quenched nor destroyed, but retreat safely.
Must then the same not be said of the deathless?
If the deathless is also indestructible, it is impossible for the soul to be destroyed when death comes upon it.
For it follows from what has been said that it will not admit death or be dead,
just as three, we said, will not be even nor will the odd; nor will fire be cold, nor the heat that is in the fire.
But, someone might say, what prevents the odd, while not becoming even as has been agreed, from being destroyed, and the even to come to be instead?
We could not maintain against the man who said this that it is not destroyed, for the uneven is not indestructible.
If we had agreed that it was indestructible we could easily have maintained that at the coming of the even, the odd and the three have gone away and the same would hold for fire and the hot and the other things.
And so now, if we are agreed that the deathless is indestructible, the soul, besides being deathless, is indestructible.
If not, we need another argument.
There is no need for one as far as that goes, for hardly anything could resist destruction if the deathless, which lasts forever, would admit destruction.
All would agree, said Socrates, that the god, and the Form of life itself, and anything that is deathless, are never destroyed.
All men would agree, by Zeus, to that, and the gods, I imagine, even more so.
If the deathless is indestructible, then the soul, if it is deathless, would also be indestructible?
Then when death comes to man, the mortal part of him dies, it seems, but his deathless part goes away safe and indestructible, yielding the place to death.
Therefore the soul, Cebes, he said, is most certainly deathless and indestructible and our souls will really dwell in the underworld.
I have nothing more to say against that, Socrates, said Cebes, nor can I doubt your arguments.
If Simmias here or someone else has something to say, he should not remain silent, for I do not know to what further occasion other than the present he could put it off if he wants to say or to hear anything on these subjects.
Certainly, said Simmias, I myself have no remaining grounds for doubt after what has been said; nevertheless, in view of the importance of our subject and my low opinion of human weakness, I am bound still to have some private misgivings about what we have said.
You are not only right to say this, Simmias, Socrates said, but our first hypotheses require clearer examination, even though we find them convincing.
And if you analyze them adequately, you will, I think, follow the argument as far as a man can, and if the conclusion is clear, you will look no further.
It is right to think then, gentlemen, that if the soul is immortal, it requires our care not only for the time we call our life, but for the sake of all time, and that one is in terrible danger if one does not give it that care.
If death were escape from everything, it would be a great boon to the wicked to get rid of the body and of their wickedness together with their soul.
But now that the soul appears to be immortal, there is no escape from evil or salvation for it except by becoming as good and wise as possible, for the soul goes to the underworld possessing nothing but its education and upbringing, which are said to bring the greatest benefit or harm to the dead right at the beginning of the journey yonder.
We are told that when each person dies, the guardian spirit who was allotted to him in life proceeds to lead him to a certain place, whence those who have been gathered together there must, after being judged, proceed to the underworld with the guide who has been appointed to lead them thither from here.
Having there undergone what they must and stayed there the appointed time, they are led back here by another guide after long periods of time.
The journey is not as Aeschylus' Teleph describes it.
He says that only one single path leads to Hades, but I think it is neither one nor simple, for then there would be no need of guides; one could not make any mistake if there were but one path.
As it is, it is likely to have many forks and crossroads; and I base this judgment on the sacred rites and customs here.
The well ordered and wise soul follows the guide and is not without familiarity with its surroundings, but the soul that is passionately attached.
The Telephus of Aeschylus is not extant.
Phaedo to the body, as I said before, hovers around it and the visible world for a long time, struggling and suffering much until it is led away by force and with difficulty by its appointed spirit.
When the impure soul which has performed some impure deed joins the others after being involved in unjust killings, or committed other crimes which are akin to these and are actions of souls of this kind, everybody shuns it and turns away, unwilling to be its fellow traveller or its guide; such a soul wanders alone completely at a loss until a certain time arrives and it is forcibly led to its proper dwelling place.
On the other hand, the soul that has led a pure and moderate life finds fellow travellers and gods to guide it, and each of them dwells in a place suited to it.
There are many strange places upon the earth, and the earth itself is not such as those who are used to discourse upon
it believe it to be in nature or size, as someone has convinced me.
Simmias said: 'What do you mean, Socrates?
I have myself heard many things said about the earth, but
certainly not the things that convince you.
I should be glad to hear them.'
Indeed, Simmias, I do not think it requires the skill of Glauc to tell you what they are, but to prove them true requires more than that skill, and I should perhaps not be able to do so.
Also, even if I had the knowledge, my remaining time would not be long enough to tell the tale.
However, nothing prevents my telling you what I am convinced is the shape of the earth and what its regions are.
Even that is sufficient, said Simmias.
Well then, he said, the first thing of which I am convinced is that if the earth is a sphere in the middle of the heavens, it has no need of air or any other force to prevent it from falling.
The homogeneous nature of the heavens on all sides and the earth's own equipoise are sufficient to hold it, for an object balanced in the middle of something homogeneous will have no tendency to incline more in any direction than any other but will remain unmoved.
This, he said, is the first point of which I am persuaded.
And rightly so, said Simmias.
Further, the earth is very large, and we live around the sea in a small portion of it between Phasis and the pillars of Heracles, like ants or frogs around a swamp; many other peoples live in many such parts of it.
Everywhere about the earth there are numerous hollows of many kinds and shapes and sizes into which the water and the mist and the air have gathered.
The earth itself is pure and lies in the pure sky where the stars are situated, which the majority of those who discourse on these subjects call the ether.
The water and mist and air are the sediment of the ether and they always flow into the hollows of the earth.
We, who dwell in the hollows of it, are unaware of this
and we think that we live above, on the surface of the earth.
It is as if someone who lived deep down in the middle.
A proverbial expression whose origin is obscure.
Phaedo of the ocean thought he was living on its surface.
Seeing the sun and the other heavenly bodies through the water, he would think the sea to be the sky; because he is slow and weak, he has never reached the surface of the sea or risen with his head above the water or come out of the sea to our region here, nor seen how much purer and more beautiful it is than his own region, nor has he ever heard of it from anyone who has seen it.
Our experience is the same: living in a certain hollow of the earth, we believe that we live upon its surface; the air we call the heavens, as if the stars made their way through it; this too is the same: because of our weakness and slowness we are not able to make our way to the upper limit of the air; if anyone got to this upper limit, if anyone came to it or reached it on wings and his head rose above it, then just as fish on rising from the sea see things in our region, he would see things there
and, if his nature could endure to contemplate them, he would know that there is the true heaven, the true light and the true earth, for the earth here, these stones and the whole region, are spoiled and eaten away, just as things in the sea are by the salt water.
Nothing worth mentioning grows in the sea, nothing, one might say, is fully developed; there are caves and sand and endless slime and mud wherever there is earth not comparable in any way with the beauties of our region.
So those things above are in their turn far superior to the things we know.
Indeed, if this is the moment to tell a tale, Simmias, it is worth hearing about the nature of things on the surface of the earth under the heavens.
At any rate, Socrates, said Simmias, we should be glad to hear this story.
Well then, my friend, in the first place it is said that the earth, looked at from above, looks like those spherical balls made up of twelve pieces of leather; it is multi colored, and of these colors those used by our painters give us an indication; up there the whole earth has these colors, but much brighter and purer than these; one part is sea green and of marvelous beauty, another is golden, another is white, whiter than chalk or snow; the earth is composed also of the other colors, more numerous and beautiful than any we have seen.
The very hollows of the earth, full of water and air, gleaming among the variety of other colors, present a color of their own so that the whole is seen as a continuum of variegated colors.
On the surface of the earth the plants grow with corresponding beauty, the trees and the flowers and the fruits, and so with the hills and the stones, more beautiful in their smoothness and transparency and color.
Our precious stones here are but fragments, our cornelians, jaspers, emeralds and the rest.
All stones there are of that kind, and even more beautiful.
The reason is that there they are pure, not eaten away or spoiled by decay and brine, or corroded by the water and air which have flowed into the hollows here and bring ugliness and disease upon earth, stones, the other animals and plants.
The earth itself is adorned with all these things, and also with gold and silver and other metals.
These stand out, being numerous and massive and occurring everywhere, so that the earth is a sight for the blessed.
There Phaedo are many other living creatures upon the earth, and also men, some living inland, others at the edge of the air, as we live on the edge of the sea, others again live on islands surrounded by air close to the mainland.
In a word, what water and the sea are to us, the air is to them and the ether is to them what the air is to us.
The climate is such that they are without disease, and they live much longer than people do here; their eyesight, hearing and intelligence and all such are as superior to ours as air is superior to water and ether to air in purity; they have groves and temples dedicated to the gods, in which the gods really dwell, and they communicate with them by speech and prophecy and by the sight of them; they see the sun and moon and stars as they are, and in other ways their happiness is in accord with this.
This then is the nature of the earth as a whole and of its surroundings; around the whole of it there are many regions in the hollows; some are deeper and more open than that in which we live; others are deeper and have a narrower opening than ours, and there are some that have less depth and more width.
All these are connected with each other below the surface of the earth in many places by narrow and broader channels, and thus have outlets through which much water flows from one to another as into mixing bowls; huge rivers of both hot and cold water thus flow beneath the earth eternally, much fire and large rivers of fire, and many of wet mud, both more pure and more muddy, such as those flowing in advance of the lava and the stream of lava itself in Sicily.
These streams then fill up every and all regions as the flow reaches each, and all these places move up and down with the oscillating movement of the earth.
The natural cause of the oscillation is as follows:
one of the hollows of the earth, which is also the biggest, pierces through the whole earth; it is that which Homer mentioned when he said: 'Far down where is the deepest pit below the earth. .
,' and which he elsewhere, and many other poets, call Tartarus; into this chasm all the rivers flow together, and again flow out of it, and each river is affected by the nature of the land through which it flows.
The reason for their flowing into and out of Tartarus is that this water has no bottom or solid base but it oscillates up and down in waves, and the air and wind about it do the same, for they follow it when it flows to this or
that part of the earth.
Just as when people breathe, the flow of air goes in and out, so here the air oscillates with the water and creates terrible winds as it goes in and out.
Whenever the water retreats to what we call the lower part of the earth, it flows into those parts and fills them up as if the water were pumped in; when it leaves that part for this, it fills these parts again, and the parts filled flow through the channels and through the earth and in each case arrive at the places to which the channels lead and create seas and marshes and rivers and springs.
From there the waters flow under the earth again, some flowing around larger and more.
Phaedo numerous regions, some round smaller and shallower ones, then flow back into Tartarus, some at a point much lower than where they issued forth, others only a little way, but all of them at a lower point, some of them at the opposite side of the chasm, some on the same side; some flow in a wide circle round the earth once or many times like snakes, then go as far down as possible, then go back into the chasm of Tartarus.
From each side it is possible to flow down as far as the center, but not beyond, for this part that faces the river flow from either side is steep.
There are many other large rivers of all kinds, and among these there are four of note; the biggest which flows on the outside (of the earth)
in a circle is called Oceanus;
opposite it and flowing in the opposite direction is the Acheron; it flows through many other deserted regions and further underground makes its way to the Acherusian lake to which the souls of the majority come after death and, after remaining there for a certain appointed time, longer for some, shorter for others, they are sent back to birth as living creatures.
The third river issues between the first two, and close to its source it falls into a region burning with much fire and makes a lake larger than our sea, boiling with water and mud.
From there it goes in a circle, foul and muddy, and winding on its way
it comes, among other places, to the edge of the Acherusian lake but does not mingle with its waters; then, coiling many times underground it flows lower down into Tartarus; this is called the Pyriphlegethon, and its lava streams throw off fragments of it in various parts of the earth.
Opposite this the fourth river issues forth, which is called Stygion, and it is said to flow first into a terrible and wild region, all of it blue gray in color, and the lake that this river forms by flowing into it is called the Styx.
As its waters fall into the lake they acquire dread powers; then diving below and winding round it flows in the opposite direction from the Pyriphlegethon and into the opposite side of the Acherusian lake; its waters do not mingle with any other; it too flows in a circle and into Tartarus opposite the Pyriphlegethon.
The name of that fourth river, the poets tell us, is Cocytus.
Such is the nature of these things.
When the dead arrive at the place to which each has been led by his guardian spirit, they are first judged as to whether they have led a good and pious life.
Those who have lived an average life make their way to the Acheron and embark upon such vessels as there are for them and proceed to the lake.
There they dwell and are purified by penalties for any wrongdoing they may have committed; they are also suitably rewarded for their good deeds as each deserves.
Those who are deemed incurable because of the enormity of their crimes, having committed many great sacrileges or wicked and unlawful murders and other such wrongs
their fitting fate is to be hurled into Tartarus never to emerge from it.
Those who are deemed to have committed great but curable crimes, such as doing violence to their father or mother in a fit of.
For these features of the underworld, see Odyssey.
Phaedo temper but who have felt remorse for the rest of their lives, or who have killed someone in a similar manner
, these must of necessity be thrown into Tartarus, but a year later the current throws them out, those who are guilty of murder by way of Cocytus, and those who have done violence to their parents by way of the Pyriphlegethon.
After they have been carried along to the Acherusian lake, they cry out and shout, some for those they have killed, others for those they have maltreated, and calling them they then pray to them and beg them to allow them to step out into the lake and to receive them.
If they persuade them, they do step out and their punishment comes to an end; if they do not, they are taken back into Tartarus and from there into the rivers, and this does not stop until they have persuaded those they have wronged,
for this is the punishment which the judges imposed on them.
Those who are deemed to have lived an extremely pious life are freed and released from the regions of the earth as from a prison; they make their way up to a pure dwelling place and live on the surface of the earth.
Those who have purified themselves sufficiently by philosophy live in the future altogether without a body; they make their way to even more beautiful dwelling places which it is hard to describe clearly, nor do we now have the time to do so.
Because of the things we have enunciated, Simmias, one must make every effort to share in virtue and wisdom in one's life, for the reward is beautiful and the hope is great.
No sensible man would insist that these things are as I have described them, but I think it is fitting for a man to risk the belief for the risk is a noble one that this, or something like this, is true about our souls and their dwelling places, since the soul is evidently immortal, and a man should repeat this to himself as if it were an incantation, which is why I have been prolonging my tale.
That is the reason why a man should be of good cheer about his own soul, if during life he has ignored the pleasures of the body and its ornamentation as of no concern to him and doing him more harm than good, but has seriously concerned himself with the pleasures of learning, and adorned his soul not with alien but with its own ornaments, namely, moderation, righteousness, courage, freedom and truth, and in that state awaits his journey to the underworld.
Now you, Simmias, Cebes and the rest of you, Socrates continued, will each take that journey at some other time
but my fated day calls me now, as a tragic character might say,
and it is about time for me to have my bath, for I think it better to have it before I drink the poison and save the women the trouble of washing the corpse.
When Socrates had said this Crito spoke.
Very well, Socrates, what are your instructions to me and the others about your children or anything else?
would please you most?
Nothing new, Crito, said Socrates, but what I am always saying, that you will please me and mine and yourselves by taking good care of your own selves in whatever you do, even if you do not agree with me now, but if you neglect your own selves, and are unwilling to live following the tracks, as it were, of Phaedo what we have said now and on previous occasions, you will achieve nothing even if you strongly agree with me at this moment.
We shall be eager to follow your advice, said Crito, but how shall we bury you?
In any way you like, said Socrates, if you can catch me and I do not escape you.
And laughing quietly, looking at us, he said: I do not convince Crito that I am this Socrates talking to you here and ordering all I say, but he thinks that I am the thing which he will soon be looking at as a corpse, and so he asks how he shall bury me.
I have been saying for some time and at some length that after I have drunk the poison I shall no longer be with you but will leave you to go and enjoy some good fortunes of the blessed, but it seems that I have said all this to him in vain in an attempt to reassure you and myself too.
Give a pledge to Crito on my behalf, he said, the opposite pledge to that he gave the jury.
He pledged that I would stay; you must pledge that I will not stay after I die, but that I shall go away, so that Crito will bear it more easily when he sees my body being burned or buried and will not be angry on my behalf, as if I were suffering terribly, and so that he should not say at the funeral that he is laying out, or carrying out, or burying Socrates.
For know you well, my dear Crito, that to express oneself badly is not only faulty as far as the language goes, but does some harm to the soul.
You must be of good cheer, and say you are burying my body, and bury it in any way you like and think most customary.
After saying this he got up and went to another room to take his bath, and Crito followed him and he told us to wait for him.
So we stayed, talking among ourselves, questioning what had been said, and then again talking of the great misfortune that had befallen us.
We all felt as if we had lost a father and would be orphaned for the rest of our lives.
When he had washed, his children were brought to him
two of his sons were small and one was older and the women of his household came to him.
He spoke to them before Crito and gave them what instructions he wanted.
Then he sent the women and children away, and he himself joined us.
It was now close to sunset, for he had stayed inside for some time.
He came and sat down after his ba